In this lecture, we're going to apply what we've learned about earthquake faulting, seismic waves, and the magnitude and intensity scales to some real earthquake case studies. We're going to focus on two main case studies, the first from a subduction zone in Japan, and the second from a continental collision zone in Iran. We'll finish the lecture by briefly discussing a more unusual category of earthquakes called intraplate earthquakes. Intra means within, so intraplate earthquakes are those which occur within the middle of tectonic plates rather than along their boundaries. Our main subduction zone case study will be the magnitude 9.0 Tohoku megathrust earthquake, which occurred offshore Japan in March 2011. We'll start with a little revision from earlier on in the course, when I showed you this map of the deadliest earthquakes of the 20th and 21st centuries, with events scaled by number of fatalities and colored by magnitude. Only earthquakes that killed at least 10,000 people are plotted. These data tell us that the largest earthquakes by magnitude, which as we know are those which occur on the largest faults, which are subduction megathrusts, are often not the most damaging. We'll consider why this might be the case in today's lecture. Our subduction megathrust case study is the Tohoku earthquake offshore Japan in 2011. At moment magnitude 9.0, this is the second largest earthquake of our lifetimes and the fourth largest on record going back to the early 20th century. It triggered a major tsunami that killed around 20,000 people, which we'll look at in detail later on in the course. A continental earthquake case study is the Bam earthquake in Iran in 2003. It was magnitude 6.6, but killed up to twice as many people as the magnitude 9.0 Tohoku earthquake. This was not a freak event. You can see from the map that this was just the latest in a long list of similar events across the Mediterranean region, the Middle East, and South and East Asia. One of the main goals of today's lecture is to understand why earthquakes in these continental collision zones can be so devastating. We'll finish the lecture by considering intraplate earthquakes. Here, rather than focus on a specific case study, we will consider the potential locations and causes of intraplate earthquakes here in Canada. This slide shows a schematic slice or cross section through a subduction zone and volcanic arc. A cold, dense oceanic plate on the right is converging with and subducting underneath an overriding plate on the left. The overriding plate could be continental, in which case we call the volcanic arc a continental arc. Alternatively, the overriding plate could be younger, warmer, and more buoyant oceanic lithosphere, in which case we call the volcanic arc an island arc. The region between the volcanic arc and the trench is known as the bore arc. Subduction zones and their volcanic arcs host a variety of earthquake types. The shallow fault forming the plate interface is known as the subduction megathrust and hosts a type of earthquake known as megathrust earthquakes. Recall that megathrust faults can be hundreds or thousands of kilometres long and are typically 100 or so kilometres wide, since they are gently inclined at dip angles of just a few degrees. There is therefore a huge surface area across which earthquake slip can propagate, and so megathrust earthquakes can reach the greatest moment magnitudes, exceeding 8 or even 9. Another important class of earthquakes in this setting are crustal events within the fore arc. These tend to be smaller in size, reaching magnitudes of up to about 7. However, they can occur at shallow depths, directly beneath the continent, which is of course where people live, and so they have the potential to cause great damage. They can involve a variety of fault types, reverse, normal, or strike-slip, depending on the subduction zone. The third most important category of earthquakes in subduction zones are intermediate-depth earthquakes, defined as those with focal depths within the range 50 to 300 kilometres. These earthquakes occur within the down-going slab, and so they are also called intra-slab earthquakes. They often involve normal faulting, related to the extension of the slab as it bends or flexes downwards. Like the crustal events, they can also reach magnitudes of about 7. We covered these three main types of subduction zone earthquakes previously, in the context of which is most dangerous here in Cascadia. However, there are some other categories of earthquake that we should also be aware of, though we will not cover them in detail. The first of these are deep earthquakes, defined as those occurring deeper than 300 kilometres, up to a maximum of about 700 kilometres depth. They are so far from the surface that they are rarely damaging, except in the very largest cases that occur directly beneath built-up regions. The asterisk here signifies that deep earthquakes only occur within some subduction zones, where the oceanic plate is subducting so rapidly that it remains cold and brittle at these great depths. Depths where mantle material normally is far too warm and ductile to host earthquake rupture. Some scientists also think that these earthquakes reflect abrupt mineral transformations from one crystal structure to another, forced by the extreme pressure. Whatever the mechanism for deep earthquakes, we do not observe them here in Cascadia. The subducting part of the Juan de Fuca plate is relatively young, having only formed a few million years ago at the Juan de Fuca Ridge, and so it is still rather warm. At depths of 300 to 700 kilometres, the Juan de Fuca slab is too warm to behave with a brittle rheology. Another more unusual category of subduction zone earthquake occurs in a region known as the outer rise. The outer rise refers to a bulge in the incoming oceanic lithosphere where it starts to flex because of the weight of the overriding plate. This bending can lead to extension and normal faulting, similar to what happens in intraslab earthquakes, but outer rise earthquakes occur at much shallower depths. Fortunately, they are usually too far offshore to cause extensive shaking damage, though larger examples can generate tsunamis. The asterisk here again signifies that not all subduction zones host this class of earthquake. And as far as we can tell, Cascadia is again an example of one which does not. The final class of earthquake associated with subduction zones are volcanic earthquakes, which are triggered by rising magma at volcanoes. These events are usually low magnitude and can even be helpful rather than a hindrance, since they may forewarn an eruption as pressure starts to build in a magma chamber. We will discuss volcanic seismicity later in the course in the module on volcanic eruptions. Now that we have summarized the various categories of earthquake that can occur within subduction zones, here are some quick reminders of a few of these types of earthquakes that we have already seen briefly in earlier lectures. The 2017 Puebla earthquake was an example of an intermediate depth or intraslab earthquake that caused extensive damage to Mexico City, even though its epicenter was quite some distance away. We discussed this in the context of basin amplification effects. The 2018 Anchorage earthquake was another example that we have looked at before. The photo here shows a nice example of liquefaction. Here in Cascadia, the best example of an intermediate depth earthquake was the 2001 Nisqually earthquake in Washington State, south of Seattle. It had a similar depth and faulting mechanism to the Puebla and Anchorage earthquakes, and was only slightly smaller in magnitude at 6.8. It killed one person, injured around 100, and caused $1 to $4 billion in damages. Some of the older students in the class may even just remember this earthquake, since it caused moderate ground shaking here in Victoria, as shown on this isoseismal map. The Puget Sound region of Washington State has a history of intraslab earthquakes. A magnitude 6.7 earthquake in 1965 occurred at 60 km depth and killed 7 people, and a magnitude 6.7 earthquake in 1949 at about 50 km depth killed 8 people. It's not clear whether within Cascadia these earthquakes are restricted to the Puget Sound region, or whether a similar event could occur beneath Victoria or Vancouver. We have also seen some examples of crustal faulting within subduction zone forearcs. Here in Cascadia, we consider an earthquake on the Seattle Fault, visible here as the east-west scarp in this LiDAR map of surface topography on Bainbridge Island, just west of Seattle. Because the fault scarp cuts through north-south glacial striations, we know that it must have been active since the end of the last glaciation, about 13,000 years ago. We therefore classify this as an active fault. The 1999 Chichi, Taiwan earthquake produced this amazing reverse fault scarp crossing this athletics track, and was an example of a modern earthquake in a subduction zone forearc setting. And the 2016 Kumamoto earthquake, which we also saw some photos from in a previous lecture, also occurred within a subduction zone forearc in Japan. In contrast with the previous examples, this earthquake involved right lateral strike slip faulting, as indicated by the offsets to the crop rows. Before discussing our main case study from subduction zone settings, the 2011 magnitude 9.0 Tohoku megathrust earthquake, I thought it would be helpful to first revise the earthquake cycle at subduction zones. The initial condition, shown here, shows an oceanic plate on the left subducting underneath an overriding plate on the right. The megathrust fault marks the shallow part of the contact surface between the two plates. During the inter-seismic period, the oceanic plate slowly converges with the overriding plate, but the megathrust fault, shown in grey, is stuck or locked. Ongoing convergence causes the overriding plate to become squeezed. At the trench, the overriding plate is slowly pushed backwards, like the loading of a spring. Further to the right, this squeezing causes the overriding plate to gradually bulge upwards, causing uplift. During the earthquake, the co-seismic phase of the earthquake cycle, with co- meaning during, these long-term motions are suddenly reversed. Friction on the locked megathrust fault is overcome, and the overriding plate slips over the subducting plate, rebounding abruptly to its original position. The previous bulge in the overriding plate is suddenly relaxed, causing subsidence at the coastline. Further out to sea, the seafloor is uplifted, raising the water column and generating a tsunami. This schematic map and cross-section highlights the tectonic setting of our case study, the 11 March 2011 magnitude 9.0 Tohoku earthquake. There are actually three subduction zones offshore Japan. The Pacific Plate and Philippine Sea Plate, both comprising oceanic lithosphere, both subduct roughly westwards between the Japan Volcanic Arc, which occupies the eastern edge of the Eurasian Plate. The Pacific Plate subducts beneath northern Japan, along the Japan Trench, and the Philippine Sea Plate subducts beneath southern Japan, along the Pacific Ocean. And the Philippine Sea Plate subducts beneath southern Japan, along the Nankai Trench. Note that there is a triple junction where the Pacific and Philippine Sea Plates meet with the overriding Japan Arc. However, the Pacific and Philippine Sea Plates subduct in slightly different directions, such that these two oceanic plates are actually converging. Where two oceanic plates converge, it will always be the older, colder, and denser of the two plates that will subduct. In this case, the older, denser plate is the Pacific Plate, which therefore subducts underneath the younger, more buoyant Philippine Sea Plate. This occurs along the Izu-Bonin Trench. The Tohoku earthquake ruptured the Japan Trench megathrust, where the Pacific Plate subducts westwards beneath the Japan Volcanic Arc, under northern Honshu, Japan's main largest island. In the years leading up to the 2011 earthquake, a dense network of GPS stations monitored inter-seismic contraction of the Japan Volcanic Arc above the locked megathrust vault. The red vectors show motion of these stations with respect to the Eurasian Plate, upon which the Japan Volcanic Arc sits. The thin curved lines show 10km depth contours of the plate interface megathrust vault, dipping westwards beneath Japan. Note how GPS vectors on the east coast of the main island of Honshu are moving 2-3cm per year towards the west, while GPS vectors on the west coast of Honshu Island are hardly moving at all. This indicates that the overriding plate is being squeezed, as shown in the cartoon on the left. The east coast of Honshu also uplifts inter-seismically as the Volcanic Arc bulges upwards, but the GPS vectors plotted here only show horizontal motions. The width of the contracting zone reflects the down-dip extent of the locked zone. The rate of contraction tells us how fast strain accumulates on the locked vault, building up to the next earthquake. On the map on the right, I'll now plot estimated rupture areas of the largest 20th century megathrust earthquakes along the Japan Trench. Areas and magnitudes for historical earthquakes before the 1960s are based on historical records of shaking intensity and tsunami wave heights. For instrumentally recorded earthquakes since the 1960s, the rupture area and magnitude can be determined from seismology. Colour is used to distinguish neighbouring earthquakes, but there is no further significance. The important point to note is that each earthquake only ruptured a relatively small patch of the megathrust vault. Rupture lengths are mostly limited to about 200km, and rupture widths to between the 10km plate interface contour at the upper edge of the rupture area and the 40km plate interface contour at the lower edge. Most of these earthquakes therefore did not rupture all the way to the surface, meaning the seafloor at the trench. The largest earthquake in this time period, in 1968, had a moment magnitude of 8.2. It caused a 6m high tsunami wave and killed around 50 people. The second largest of these earthquakes was a magnitude 8.1 event in 2003, which generated a 4m high tsunami wave and killed one person. We're now going to examine the megathrust vault itself in more detail. In particular, we will consider what frictional properties could lead to the patterns of earthquakes observed in the previous slide. We will do so using this cutaway schematic, which shows a typical interpretation of the subductions of earthquakes. The shallowest part of the vault sits below the accretionary wedge, a triangular-shaped mass of marine sediments, mostly mud, scraped off the oceanic seafloor as it enters the subduction zone. The accretionary wedge therefore sits above the shallowest part of the megathrust vault. Since the sediments that make up the wedge are loose and unconsolidated, it is difficult to determine whether or not they are subduction zones. Since the sediments that make up the wedge are loose and unconsolidated, they cannot stick to the oceanic plate. Instead, they slide over it in a slow and steady motion known as fault creep. By creeping in this way, the shallowest part of the megathrust vault avoids the stick-slip motion associated with earthquakes. The megathrust in this shallow creeping zone is therefore labelled aseismic, meaning without earthquakes. The red patches of the illustration are locked parts of the megathrust vault, where the overriding plate is stronger and the vault exhibits stick-slip behaviour. They are labelled seismic, meaning that the slip occurs in earthquakes. These patches typically extend from about 10km depth to about 40km depth, as shown in the previous slide. They represent the parts of the vault that ruptured in earthquakes offshore northern Japan previously. As we saw, the lengths of these rupture areas seem limited to about 200km. The orange parts of the fault creep most of the time, but can be involved in an earthquake when a neighbouring red patch ruptures. They are called conditionally stable. In the largest earthquakes, like the magnitude 8.2 earthquake in 1968 and the magnitude 8.1 earthquake in 2003, a couple of neighbouring red patches may have ruptured together by involving some intervening orange area. At depths below about 40km, the subduction fault moves in episodic slow-slip events, which are intermediatory between continuous creep and abrupt earthquakes. These slow-slip episodes are accompanied by tiny earthquakes called tremor, but do not pose a hazard. Next, we will look at how the 2011 Tohoku earthquake took scientists by surprise by breaking some of the rules and assumptions outlined in this schematic. The following video will illustrate the shaking experienced in Tokyo, about 400km southwest of the earthquake epicentre. At the start of the video, you will see a computer counting down the arrival of the surface waves and the commencement of heavy shaking. This is the world's most sophisticated earthquake early warning system in action. The real take-home point of the video, however, is the duration of shaking. We will discuss its significance after the video plays. 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 Arrival Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Shaking Because slip in an earthquake migrates along the fault at a certain speed, about 2-3km per second, the duration of earthquake slip is roughly proportional to the length of the fault rupture. And because slip generates surface waves, the duration of the rupture can be approximated by the time of the heaviest shaking. In the previous video, we observed about 2-3 minutes of strong shaking, which means that for a full 2-3 minutes, some part of the fault was rupturing somewhere. If the rupture propagates at about 2-3km per second, we can estimate that a fault length of about 300-400km must have ruptured. An estimate of the final slip distribution of the Tahuku earthquake is plotted on this map in the shades of yellow through red. The pattern is estimated by modelling GPS displacements indicated by the arrows. Red arrows show observed displacements and blue arrows show model displacements. These illustrate the expected pattern of elastic rebound as the fault becomes unstuck and the overriding plate slips back over the subducting plate, as shown in the cartoon on the right. The length of the rupture area from north to south is about 300-400km, in good agreement with the duration of strong ground shaking of 2-3 minutes. In addition, slip extends from about 40km depth all the way to the seafloor at the Japan Trench. Peak slip in this model is 40m, but other models suggest as much as 50-60m of slip, a record for an earthquake studied using modern data and methods. Looking at the map of previous 20th century earthquakes, and plotting the 2011 Tahuku earthquake over the top, confirms that a far larger portion of the megathrust fault was involved this time. And unlike the previous 20th century earthquakes, the 2011 Tahuku earthquake ruptured from a depth of about 40km all the way to the seafloor at the trench. This leads us to revise our previous conceptual model of the frictional properties of the megathrust fault. The shallow megathrust turned out not to be aseismic as previously thought, but rather conditionally stable, meaning that although it normally creeps, it can also be involved in the very largest earthquakes. This allowed the Tahuku earthquake to rupture all the way to the seafloor at the trench. The exceptionally large fault slip, and the fact that the earthquake ruptured upwards all the way to the seafloor, generated an unusually large tsunami wave, as shown in these before and after photographs. Whereas tsunami run-ups triggered by previous 20th century earthquakes were up to about 5-6m in height, the Tahuku tsunami reached 10-20m on average, with a maximum recorded height of an incredible 39m. In this amazing pair of photographs, we see the tsunami overtopping a seawall that was built to withstand run-ups of several metres. The seawall was clearly insufficient to stop the tsunami wave caused by this magnitude 9 earthquake. We'll learn a lot more about this incredible tsunami later on in the course. Could Japan have anticipated earthquakes of magnitude 9 with tsunami run-ups that in many places exceeded 10, 20 or even 30m? Hazard and risk analyses under Tatian before 2011 had only considered the possibility of earthquakes up to a magnitude of about 8.2, similar in size to the largest earthquakes recorded in the past century or so. Retrospectively, this 100-year record of seismic activity proved to be insufficient. The Sendai plain, shown in this photograph, was the area of the furthest inundation in the 2011 tsunami. The 20m high wave travelled up to 5km inland. This coastal plain was formed by meandering rivers and streams, depositing layer upon layer of mud over tens or hundreds of thousands of years. Large tsunami waves bring with them marine debris – sand, shells and other debris – that would not normally be deposited on a river plain. So by looking closely below the surface, at layer upon sedimentary layer, we can look for evidence of previous large tsunami deposits. The study of historic and prehistoric earthquakes through the sedimentary record is known as paleoseismology, with paleo meaning old. This photo shows a section through the uppermost 1.5m of the deposits of the Sendai coastal plain, at a locality that is a few kilometres from the coastline. Darker brown layers are muds deposited by rivers, and soils and peats that formed in the river's floodplains. Grey layers contain the marine sands, shells and debris of a tsunami deposit. The white layer is ash fallout from a volcanic eruption – Japan, after all, is a volcanic arc. The ash is useful because it can be dated using radiometric dating, providing a chronological benchmark. This particular layer is from a major volcanic eruption in 915 CE. This study was undertaken after the 2011 earthquake and tsunami, and so the Tohoku tsunami deposit can be seen at the surface. A similarly thick layer of tsunami deposits underlies the ash layer dated at 915 CE. This is associated with a major tsunami called the Jogen tsunami that occurred in 869 CE. The existence of this tsunami was known from historical accounts, but there was little clue as to just how large it was until this study. The sedimentary evidence from Sendai Plain suggests that the Jogen tsunami was as large as the one caused by the 2011 Tohoku earthquake. A third, thinner sand layer may be associated with the 1611 Keicho tsunami, another event whose existence is known from historical accounts. Therefore, there is evidence from the sedimentary layers that earthquakes with similar characteristics to the 2011 Tohoku earthquake, and large enough to have flooded the Sendai coastal plain, might occur on average about every 500 to 1,000 years. Retrospectively then, the answer is yes, Japan could and perhaps should have anticipated an earthquake and tsunami of the dimensions witnessed in 2011. A critical question here in the northeastern Pacific Ocean is whether the Cascadia megathrust fault could behave similarly to how the Japan trench megathrust did in the 2011 Tohoku earthquake. Just as in Japan, the shallowest part of the Cascadia megathrust lies beneath a wedge of unconsolidated sediment scraped off the Wanda-Fuka plate as it enters the seduction zone. This accretionary wedge is shown in the seismic reflection image collected offshore Tofino, BC. Could this shallow part of the megathrust fault slip in a great Cascadia earthquake? The answer to this question could govern whether peak tsunami run-ups are 5 metres in height or 25 metres. At present, we don't know, but this is an area of active research, including here at UVic. This figure shows three models of what a magnitude 9 Cascadia earthquake might look like. The western limit to the rupture area, reflective of the shallow part of the megathrust fault, is most important in governing the size of the tsunami wave. In the left-hand model, slip falls short of reaching the trench. This would be our best case scenario because the tsunami run-ups generated by this earthquake might only be a few metres in height. In the middle model, peak slip occurs at the trench. This is what happened in the Tohoku earthquake and could be considered a worst-case scenario, generating tsunami run-ups that could greatly exceed 10 metres in height. The right-hand model shows an intermediate situation in which slip tapers off at shallow depths, with only a little reaching the seafloor. The down-dip eastward limit of coseismic slip is also important, but for other reasons. If slip stops at 30 kilometres depth, then the rupture terminates under the west coast of Vancouver Island, near, say, Port Renfrew. However, if slip stops at 40 kilometres depth, then rupture continues eastwards all the way to underneath Victoria. There would be a huge difference in how much shaking Victoria experiences. Fortunately, most models now suggest that rupture will stop at approximately 30 kilometres depth, including all three of the models shown in this figure, but we don't know for sure. Thank you for watching.