In the second part of the lecture, we'll focus on the 2003 Ban earthquake in Iran, our main case study of a continental plate boundary earthquake. We'll complete the lecture by taking a quick look at a rarer category of earthquakes, intraplate earthquakes, which are those which occur within tectonic plates, as opposed to around their boundaries. Continent-continent tectonic plate boundaries include convergent continental collision zones, like the India-Eurasia collision, part of which is displayed in the schematic cross-section of the Himalaya, upper left, continental shear zones, like in California, represented by the aerial photograph of the San Andreas fault, upper right, and divergent continental rifts, represented by the cartoon at the bottom. Continental collision zones include a mix of earthquake types, including reverse or thrust faults, strike-slip faults, and even normal faults in some of the world's tallest plateaus, like Tibet. Continental shear zones naturally involve strike-slip faults, though reverse and normal faulting earthquakes are also possible, especially where the main strike-slip faults bend or break up into left- or right-stepping fault segments. Continental rifts mostly involve normal faulting, though strike-slip earthquakes do sometimes also occur. One characteristic that is common to all three types of continent-continent plate boundary is that they generally involve upper crustal earthquakes only. The continental seismogenic zone is usually about 15 km thick, and earthquake faulting does not extend as deep as 30-40 km as it does on subduction megathrust faults. The thinner seismogenic layer in continent-continent plate boundaries limits earthquakes to large magnitudes of 7-8. Great earthquakes larger than 8 are extremely uncommon in these tectonic settings. Another aspect that is common to all three types of continent-continent plate boundary is that faulting tends to be spread over wide plate boundary zones rather than focused on a small number of major faults, as is the case for subduction zones and other oceanic plate boundaries. This can make it very challenging to identify all of the hazardous faulting, because there is simply so much of it. We've seen a few examples of surface rupturing earthquakes in these tectonic settings already. For example, the 2016 Kaikoura earthquake in New Zealand occurred on a shear zone between continental portions of the Pacific and Australian plates. Unusually, this earthquake involved rupture of 20 individual faults, including a mix of strike-slip, reverse and oblique-slip faults. This photograph is of the oblique Papatea fault. Note both the vertical offset evident from the fault scarp, and the large left-lateral strike-slip offset to the railway tracks. The 2019 Ridgecrest, California earthquake sequence occurred in the eastern California shear zone, which forms part of the Pacific North America plate boundary zone east of the main San Andreas fault. The photograph here is of a clear right-lateral offset to a gravel road. The 2016 Norcia, Italy earthquake occurred within the Apennine Mountains in central Italy, an example of a continental rift. Here we see a clear normal fault scarp generated in the earthquake. Recall that, because of their dip direction and relative sense of motion, normal faulting earthquakes often expose the actual rupture plane, which is what the field geologists here are looking at. Today's main case study, though, is located within the most diffuse plate boundary zone of all, a vast region of mountain building known as the Alpine Himalayan Belt. This map displays the high topography of the region, including the Alps and the Himalayas, naturally, but also several other of the world's tallest mountain belts. Also plotted on the map are beach ball symbols representing earthquakes greater than about magnitude 5 recorded over the past few decades. The red symbols are large reverse or thrust earthquakes, black beach balls are large strike-slip earthquakes, and the rarer blue symbols are large normal faulting earthquakes. Almost all of the earthquakes on this map occurred at shallow crustal depths of up to about 15 km. The Alpine Himalayan Belt is actually formed from three separate collision zones, all involving the Eurasian continent in the north. In the west, the Africa plate moves northward with respect to Eurasia at several mm per year. In the central part of the belt, the Arabian plate moves northward also at several mm per year. And in the east, the Indian plate moves northward with respect to Eurasia at a few cm per year. The key take-home point of this slide is just how diffuse these plate boundary zones are. Rather than being focused along a single main plate boundary fault, deformation and seismicity is instead spread out over a vast area. This makes it very challenging to map out all of the hazardous faults. We're now going to focus on Iran, which occupies the central part of the Arabia-Eurasia continental collision zone. This map displays GPS velocities, large earthquake epicenters, and the topography of Iran. The GPS vectors represent motions in mm per year with respect to the stable Eurasian plate along the northern edge of the map. Note how the vector lengths shorten from south to north across Iran, but also how the vector azimuths or directions do not change much. This shows that Iran is accommodating contractional strain or shortening. Earthquakes in Iran therefore predominantly involve reverse or thrust faulting, though strike-slip mechanisms are also common. Strike-slip faults are especially prevalent in eastern Iran, where the northward GPS motions drop off eastwards into Afghanistan on the right edge of the map. This results in north-south oriented right lateral shear between central Iran and Afghanistan. The black circles show earthquakes larger than about magnitude 4 recorded over the past few decades. Note that these are concentrated in certain belts, but that few regions of Iran have no earthquakes whatsoever. Essentially the entire country of Iran is one large diffuse plate boundary zone. Colours show the topography of the region. Most of Iran is formed of rugged mountainous topography. Note how the seismicity seems to be concentrated along or at the edges of the highest mountain belts. This reflects that the mountains are being raised along reverse and thrust faults that accommodate shortening within the continental collision. There is therefore a direct link between the plate motions, the earthquakes and the mountainous topography. Here we zoom in on eastern Iran. This region is one of the most arid in the entire world, comprising two large flat and low-lying deserts. The Dasht-e Lut, or Desert of Emptiness, in the west, and the Dasht-e Margo, or Desert of Death, in the east, crossing the border with Afghanistan. Despite being largely inhospitable, numerous small oasis towns exist at the mountainous margins of these two deserts. This map also displays mapped active faults, indicated by the black lines. These form a complex network that is typical of continental plate boundary zones. The major north-south faults are right-lateral strike-slip faults, which accommodate the northward motion of central Iran with respect to Afghanistan, as was evident from the GPS vectors in the previous figure. A handful of east-west left-lateral faults can also be made out. Faults marked with small teeth symbols are reverse faults, and many of these reverse faults lie at the terminations of the strike-slip faults. Eastern Iran has a long history of destructive earthquakes. Just within the latter part of the 20th century, these include three large earthquakes on the east-west Dasht-e Bayaz fault, the largest of which killed around 10,000 people. A thrust earthquake in 1978 that struck the oasis town of Tabas, killing 11,000 people, a whole 85% of its population, a world record for an earthquake. A pair of large earthquakes in 1981 on the north-south right-lateral Gauk fault, that each killed more than 1,000 people. And a large earthquake in 1997 on the north-south right-lateral Abiz fault, that also killed over 1,000 people. Our case study, the 2003 magnitude 6.6 Bam earthquake, was therefore just the latest in a long line of destructive earthquakes in eastern Iran. The town of Bam lies in the southern part of the Dasht-e Lut desert. The city is famous for its enormous medieval citadel, the largest adobe or mud brick building in the world, and a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The origin of this citadel can be traced back around 1,500 years to the first Persian Empire. The Bam earthquake struck on 26th of December 2003 at 5.30 in the morning local time. The medieval citadel, which had stood for centuries, was destroyed in a matter of seconds. Somewhere between 26,000 and 40,000 people lost their lives in the earthquake, approximately half of Bam's population. Note how many of the buildings in this photograph are, or rather were, constructed from masonry or brick. We will see later on in the course that this is a particularly bad style of building for withstanding the strong horizontal ground motions that accompany large earthquakes. Around 60% of Bam's modern buildings were destroyed, and as many as 90% of the older adobe buildings collapsed. Bam differed from the other recent devastating earthquakes in this region in one interesting respect. The town of Bam does not lie on any mapped fault line. Therefore, immediately after the earthquake, the race was on to discover the fault responsible for this devastating earthquake. Because of the severe destruction to Bam and its remote desert location, it was difficult for field geologists to arrive quickly at the scene. Instead, satellite remote sensing played a key role in revealing the source of this damaging earthquake. One technique which came to the fore, and which was relatively new at that time, was INSAR. INSAR is a type of radar measurement collected from satellites in low Earth orbit, that is around 800 kilometers above the Earth's surface. Like any radar technique, INSAR works by emitting electromagnetic waves at radio frequencies, bouncing them off a distant target, in this case the Earth's surface, and measuring the waves that are reflected back. The trick with INSAR is to fake a very large antenna by combining several adjacent images collected along the track of the satellite. This so-called synthetic aperture allows the radar image of Earth's surface to have a much finer spatial resolution. For each pixel on the ground, we measure both the amplitude and the phase of the backscattered radio waves. In order to see what happened in the earthquake, we need to combine a radar image taken before the earthquake with one collected afterwards. Here is the satellite returning after the earthquake. Any displacement to the Earth's surface, such as due to faulting in an earthquake, changes the distance between the ground and the satellite. So when we repeat the radar measurement, we look for small changes in the phase of the backscattered radio waves. Differencing of the before and after phase measurements gives rise to an interference pattern which can be displayed on a map called a radar interferogram. The coloured fringes of the interferogram represent contours of the coseismic ground motion towards or away from the satellite. By modelling the pattern of fringes, geophysicists can map out the faulting involved in the earthquake and can characterise its relative sense of movement. In this incident, there were two faults involved, a main right lateral strike-slip fault in the west and a secondary reverse fault in the east. Later, when the first geologists arrived on the scene, they were able to confirm what modelling of the INSAR data had suggested. This photograph shows a small surface rupture along the main right lateral strike-slip fault. The white parts of the interferogram are areas in which no coherent interference pattern was observed because of abrupt changes in the backscattering characteristics of pixels from the before to the after radar images. In this instance, the white areas outline the heavily damaged city of Bam and its eastern agricultural suburb of Barabat. What is now evident is that the two faults almost perfectly bisect the settlements of Bam and Barabat. The earthquake, therefore, was a direct bullseye hit on these two towns. This helps to explain why such a large proportion of Bam's buildings collapsed and why the death toll from this earthquake was so terrible. This shows another type of satellite image of the area, taken by the Landsat satellite. This mimics conventional photographs but makes use of different frequencies of light to highlight the geology and vegetation. Look carefully at the Landsat image along the 2003 Bam earthquake surface ruptures, the two black lines. You can make out some changes in the surface geology, particularly along the eastern of the two faults. This eastern reverse fault runs along the foot of a small escarpment known as the Bam-Barabat Ridge since it separates Bam to the west from Barabat to the east. Sketching a geological cross-section through the escarpment, we can see that repeated earthquakes along this reverse fault have uplifted the Bam-Barabat Ridge. The ridge-bounding fault is impermeable, so the water table dams against it. Gently sloping underground tunnels called canats have been dug into the side of the ridge, tapping this water source and transporting fresh water to the agricultural suburb of Barabat where it irrigates farms and date plantations. These systems of underground irrigation tunnels, or canats, are common in desert settlements across Iran, and their construction goes back 3,000 years. The photos here show some examples. This first one shows a series of vertical access shafts dug at short intervals along the underground canat. Here is water flowing along the gently sloping underground channel. And here is the entrance to a canat where the water pours out to irrigate the desert. In fact, without the reliable water source provided by canats, desert towns like Barabat and Bam would simply not exist. The underground source of the water, all too often, is a water table that is raised against an impermeable active fault. Moreover, over hundreds of thousands of earthquake cycles, these same faults generate mountainous topography, which helps to focus orographic precipitation. A large number of cities, towns and villages are therefore located along the edges of mountain ranges, right where the active faults are. In Iran and many other arid countries, water therefore provides the critical link in a fatal attraction between earthquakes and humans. This nighttime composite satellite image of Iran, with mapped active faults superimposed as yellow lines, demonstrates this deadly relationship. Note how many large Iranian towns and cities are situated right along, or at least very close to, active faults. This includes numerous cities with populations that far exceed those of Bam. The largest city of all, of course, is Tehran, which has a population of around 14 million people. Tehran sits right up against the steep southern slopes of the Alborz, the tallest mountain range in Iran. Orographic precipitation in the Alborz, including heavy snowfall in the winter, provides Tehran with all of its water. Uplift of the Alborz is accommodated in part by a major thrust fault along its southern flank, called the North Tehran Fault. Other smaller reverse faults, not shown on this map, are thought to underlie the central downtown area of Tehran. Tehran has a long written history, since it was an important staging post on the Silk Road, the major trading route between China and Europe. We therefore know that the settlement of Tehran was destroyed by large earthquakes in 855 CE, 958 CE, 1177, and 1830 CE. At all of these times, though, Tehran was very small. Only within the past century has its population ballooned to its current 14 million. The inevitable next large earthquake to strike Tehran is likely to be devastating. The fatal attraction between people and faults helps to explain the abundance of highly destructive earthquakes right across the Alpine Himalayan belt. Many of the deadliest events of the past century had large magnitudes in the 6s and 7s, but not great magnitudes of 8 and above. Like BAM, many of these earthquakes were direct hits on towns or cities built upon active faults for their source of water. In the last part of the lecture, we'll look at intraplate earthquakes, which are a relatively unusual category of event, defined by their occurrence outside tectonic plate boundary zones. A few recent large intraplate earthquakes here in Canada are highlighted on this map. The earthquake beach balls are colored according to the type of faulting involved, with red representing reverse faulting events. Intraplate earthquakes occur because tectonic plates are not perfectly rigid. Tectonic stresses generated along plate boundaries can be transmitted through the interior of the plate, where any pre-existing planes of weakness can fail in response. In addition, intraplate earthquakes are sometimes triggered by internal sources of stress acting within the plates. Intraplate seismicity is a significant hazard in those parts of eastern Canada associated with former continental rifting, including rifts that proceeded all the way to seafloor spreading, forming passive continental margins, and those which did not, so-called failed rifts. The St. Lawrence Rift, formed in the late Proterozoic to early Paleozoic eras, and the ancient faults that once accommodated its crustal stretching, are now the locus of modern intraplate seismicity. The largest historical earthquakes in the so-called Charlevoix seismic zone are believed to have exceeded magnitude 7. The Labrador Sea is another failed continental rift associated with the partial rifting of Greenland from North America in the early Cenozoic era. It, too, can host large intraplate earthquakes, with an event in 1933 likely to have exceeded magnitude 7. The Atlantic passive continental margin on the east coast marks where continental rifting of Pangaea progressed into full seafloor spreading. It hosted the Grand Banks earthquake of 1929, which also exceeded magnitude 7. This earthquake triggered a huge submarine landslide and tsunami, which we'll learn about later in the course. Interestingly, in all three of these areas, the ancient faults that host the intraplate earthquakes all originally formed as normal faults, but the modern intraplate earthquakes themselves involved reverse faulting. In other words, the modern earthquakes reverse the original sense of motion on these faults. The horizontal compressive stresses that these intraplate earthquakes are responding to are likely generated at the mid-Atlantic ridge, as the North American and Eurasian plates are pushed to one side to accommodate the formation of new oceanic crust. Other intraplate earthquakes respond to internal sources of stress. Post-glacial earthquakes are a type of seismicity triggered by stresses associated with the melting of ice sheets. The best known examples are from northern Scandinavia, like the Parvi fault shown here in northern Sweden. The Parvi fault scarp is thought to have formed in a single reverse faulting earthquake of about magnitude 8 roughly 12,000 years ago. As the weight of the ice is removed, return flow of the asthenosphere causes the lithosphere to flex upwards, stressing and reactivating ancient crustal faults. Though most of the largest known post-glacial fault scarps formed at the end of the Pleistocene period, post-glacial rebound is ongoing in these high-latitude regions, and so the hazard lingers on. The 1989 magnitude 6 Ungava earthquake in northern Quebec was likely a post-glacial earthquake. Certain human activities can also generate stresses in the crust that can trigger so-called induced earthquakes. Some of the activities associated with induced earthquakes are shown here. They include injection of fluids into the subsurface, extractive industries like mining, and the impoundment of water behind reservoirs. Of these, the activity most likely to trigger induced earthquakes is subsurface fluid injection. This occurs during hydraulic fracturing or fracking operations. Fracking involves injecting pressurized fluids and sand into a wellbore to create cracks in the surrounding sedimentary rocks. Oil or natural gas that is normally trapped within sedimentary pores will flow more freely along the cracks and can be extracted. Waste fluids from the fracking are then injected at even deeper levels in order to reduce the risk of contaminating ground or surface water. When the pressurized fluids come into contact with a fault, they have the effect of reducing the stresses that normally keep the fault clamped shut, reducing these clamping stresses sufficiently and the fault may slip in an earthquake. The technique of fracking was developed here in North America and became widespread in around 2009, particularly in the central United States. This chart shows the cumulative number of earthquakes greater than magnitude 3 recorded across the entire central United States. Prior to 2009, only around 25 earthquakes would be recorded in a typical year. These are plotted in blue on the map and form the blue line on the chart. After 2009, and soon after the start of fracking operations across this region, the seismicity rate went through the roof. These events are plotted in red on both the map and the chart. By 2015, there were around 1,000 earthquakes recorded annually across the central US, 40 to 50 times the natural background rate observed before 2009. Much of the seismicity is concentrated in the state of Oklahoma, which in the past few years has experienced a greater number of earthquakes than even California. So far, the largest of these earthquakes were a pair of events in the high fives, large enough to cause significant damage and injure a few people, but fortunately not large enough to kill anyone. Fracking operations here in Canada have also given rise to induced earthquakes, particularly within the oil fields of northeastern British Columbia and northwestern Alberta. This time-lapse map of the region, spanning the interval from 2001 to 2015, shows earthquakes as red circles and hydraulic fracturing wells as black dots. The chart shows both the cumulative number of earthquakes, indicated by the red line, and also the cumulative number of hydraulic fracturing wells, indicated by the black line. The map and the chart both demonstrate an abrupt uptick in hydraulic fracturing starting in around 2009 to 2010. About three years later, in around 2012 to 2013, the seismicity rate also turns sharply upwards. This pattern mimics the one seen in the central United States, and the cause is much the same. What's interesting in this graph is the delay between the increase in hydraulic fracturing and the increase in seismicity. However, this delay is to be expected, since it takes time for the injected fluid pressure to build up to the point that faults are unclamped and can slip in induced earthquakes. This concludes this lecture.