Having learned about different types of volcanoes and volcanic eruptions in the last lecture, we'll now turn our attention to the associated hazards. In the first part of the lecture, we consider the various types of hazard using a variety of short case studies to illustrate. Then, in the second part, we'll focus more on one particular case study, the 1980 eruption of Mount St Helens here in Cascadia. We'll finish the second part by considering global patterns in volcanic risks and how to reduce these risks through volcano monitoring. First, though, different types of volcanic hazard. We saw this schematic briefly at the start of the last lecture. It indicates the wide variety of hazards associated with volcanoes and volcanic eruptions. We will cover most of these hazards in today's lecture. A key theme of the lecture is that not all volcanic hazards are created equal. Some are far deadlier than others. Some have only a very local impact, while others can affect large parts of the planet. This plot aims to capture graphically these differences in the severity and spatial extents of various volcanic hazards. We will consider all of the hazards shown here, with the exception of debris avalanches, which we will cover in the landslides module, and tsunamis, which can be triggered by volcanic eruptions, but which have their own separate module. We'll roughly go in the order of left to right, thereby starting with hazards that have only a local impact, though it may be a severe one, and ending with those that may have a global impact. The 2018 eruption of Kilauea in Hawaii is the first of our short case studies. Kilauea is an active shield volcano on the Big Island of Hawaii. It lies just to the southeast of the larger shield volcano Mauna Loa, which we encountered in the previous lecture. Kilauea is at present much smaller than Mauna Loa, but it appears to be the more active of the two. This is expected, since as the Pacific plate moves northwestwards over the stationary Hawaiian mantle plume, the locus of volcanic activity is expected to migrate slowly southeastwards. The 2018 eruption occurred in the eastern part of Kilauea, in what is called the East Rift Zone. Starting on May 3rd and continuing for several weeks, lava spilled out of several fissures numbered on the map along this linear trend. The 2018 lava flows are colored in pink. Fissures and lava flows obliterated the residential neighborhood of Leilani Estates, forcing the evacuation of about 2,000 residents and causing around $800 million in damages. 24 people were injured, though fortunately nobody was killed. Several older lava flows are shaded in purple, numbered with the years that they were active. One has to ask why so much of this area was residentially zoned. One neighborhood, Nanawali Estates, had even been built right on top of mapped lava flows. This following video summarizes events of the first month of the eruption. As you watch it, look out for the two distinctive types of lava flow characteristic of Hawaiian-type eruptions – smooth, runny pahoehoe flows and viscous, blocky a'a flows. Watch out also for the large volcanic bombs that can be seen flung out by jets of steam from fissure number 17 about one minute into the video. The first fissure opened along the lower East Rift Zone in a residential subdivision called Leilani Estates. Between May 3rd and May 6th, 10 fissures opened in the lower East Rift Zone. By May 15th, the number of fissures increased to 20. On May 19th, lava flow fronts formed and moved towards the ocean to the southeast. On May 29th, vigorous lava flows from fissure 8 began to move northeast towards Kapoho Bay. Next, we'll look at some incredible footage of a slow, viscous a'a flow destroying property Breaking news about bad weather. Mother Nature Angry Caught on Camera top 5 and top 10. Extreme Breaking news about bad weather. Mother Nature Angry Caught on Camera top 5 and top 10. Extreme weather 2021, earthquake 2021, tornado 2021, storm 2021, hurricane 2021, cyclone 2021, flood 2021, fire 2021, heavy rain 2021, rain 2021, landslide 2021, landfall 2021, hailstorm 2021, snowfall 2021. Breaking news about bad weather. Mother Nature Angry Caught on Camera top 5 and top 10. Extreme weather 2021, earthquake 2021, tornado 2021, storm 2021, hurricane 2021, cyclone 2021, flood 2021, fire 2021, heavy rain 2021, landslide 2021, landfall 2021, hailstorm 2021, snowfall 2021. mother nature angry caught on camera top 5 and top 10. Breaking news about bad weather. Mother Nature Angry Caught on Camera top 5 and top 10.   Breaking news about bad weather. Mother Nature Angry Caught on Camera top 5 and top 10.   Breaking news about bad weather. Mother Nature Angry Caught on Camera top 5 and top 10.   Breaking news about bad weather. Mother Nature Angry Caught on Camera top 5 and top 10. Breaking news about bad weather. Mother Nature Angry Caught on Camera top 5 and top 10. It's man versus Mother Nature in a match Darryl Clinton intends to win. The most violent explosions are also accompanied by shock waves defined as atmospheric pressure waves that exceed the speed of sound. These can be quite spectacular though they usually cause only minor damage. The example here is from a volcanian type eruption of Mount Taborvor, a small stratovolcano in Papua New Guinea. in 2014. Look carefully and you will also spot some absolutely huge blocks and bombs being ejected in the eruption. Holy smokin' toledo's. As we reach the end of the video, note the clouds of ash on the slopes of the volcano. These are pyroclastic flows, rapid downslope gravity currents of hot pyroclastic debris and gas that accompany volcanian, plinian and ultraplinian type eruptions. Though their effects are usually localised to a volcano's slopes, and the land immediately surrounding these slopes, they are nevertheless amongst the very deadliest of all volcanic hazards, as we shall see. Pyroclastic flows are fluidised because they contain water and gases from the eruption, and because they entrain and override air from the surrounding atmosphere as they move downslope. Flows usually consist of two parts. The basal flow hugs the ground and contains larger, coarse boulders and rock fragments, while an extremely hot, turbulent ash plume lofts above it, drawing in outside atmospheric air. Small flows typically travel at about 20m per second, but larger flows can reach speeds of about 10 times that, or 200m per second, around 700km per hour, and typically travel several kilometres. The kinetic energy is sufficient to flatten everything in the path of the flow, and with temperatures within the flow reaching 1000 degrees Celsius, any organic matter is incinerated. This particular flow was produced in a low-level volcanion-type eruption of the Suprier Hills stratovolcano on Montserrat in the Lesser Antilles Volcanic Arc of the Caribbean. Pyroclastic flows from the 1902 volcanion-type eruption of Mount Pele, a stratovolcano on nearby Martinique, were the cause of the single deadliest volcanic disaster of the 20th century, and the third deadliest ever recorded. The town of Saint-Pierre, then nicknamed the Paris of the Caribbean, lay at the foot of the volcano, only about 7km from its summit. All but two of the town's inhabitants, a population of around 30,000, were killed. One of the two survivors was a lucky prisoner who had been kept locked up in an underground dungeon. Even though little was known about volcanic eruptions at the time, many people had wanted to evacuate the town in an alarming two-week acceleration of volcanic activity that preceded the climactic eruption. Unfortunately, the island was in the midst of general elections, socialists poised to take control from right-wing politicians. However, Saint-Pierre was the main centre of conservative votes, and so the governor, keen to keep his right-wing colleagues in power, put off evacuation until polling day on 11th May. Troops forcibly turned back those who tried to leave, sentencing thousands of people to certain death. This photo shows the remnants of a building destroyed by pyroclastic flows during the 1982 Plinian-type eruption of the El Chicon stratovolcano in southern Mexico. The reinforcement rods in the concrete pillars are bent in the direction of flow. A total of nine villages were completely destroyed in this event, killing 1,900 people. Pyroclastic flows can actually be triggered in a number of different ways. The first is through the collapse of a lava dome, a steepened pile of especially viscous lava that forms around the volcanic vent in some Vulcanian and Plinian-type eruptions. The second is from the spillover of lava from a lava lake that may form within a crater at the top of the stratovolcano. The third is when the eruption blasts out the side of the volcano in what is known as a lateral blast. We'll look at this process in our study of the 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption in the second part of this lecture. The final way in which pyroclastic flows can form is when a volcanic plume no longer has the momentum or temperature to sustain its ascent and collapses under its own weight. One of the best ever recorded pyroclastic flows was one on the flanks of Mount Unzen, a stratovolcano in Japan, on June 3, 1991. In fact, the following footage was the very first time a pyroclastic flow had been caught on film. The volcano had undergone a two-week build-up in activity and its surroundings had been evacuated. However, a number of small pyroclastic flows that reached as far as three kilometres from the volcano had attracted the attention of volcanologists, journalists and government officials, who set up an observation post four kilometres from the volcano, which was considered a safe distance. Unfortunately, it was not safe and 43 people were killed, including three volcanologists, Maurice and Katia Kraft and Harry Glicken. The start of the footage reveals how the pyroclastic flow was caused by collapse of a newly formed magmatite. By the time a TV camera in the village records this scene, Maurice, Katia and 41 others are dead. The pyroclastic flow on June 3 reached four and a half kilometres from the volcano, overwhelming the observation station. Weather also played a factor in this disaster, as the top of the volcano was shrouded in clouds and the group on the observation deck did not see the collapse of the lava dome or the approaching pyroclastic flow until it was too late. We've learned a lot about pyroclastic flows since the devastating disasters at Mount Pele in 1902, Mount St Helens in 1980, El Chicon in 1982 and Mount Unzen in 1991. In particular, we've learned that in the build-up of activity that precedes major volcanic eruptions, much larger areas need to be evacuated. Unfortunately, however, it is not always the case that an eruption, even one explosive enough to generate pyroclastic flows, can be anticipated ahead of time. This can be illustrated in the 27th of September 2014 eruption of Mount Ontake, another stratovolcano in Japan. Mount Ontake is Japan's second-largest volcano after Mount Fuji. The 2014 eruption was unusual since there were no significant earthquakes that might have warned authorities in the lead-up to the eruption. The mountain is a popular tourist attraction for hikers. It was a Saturday and the weather was also good, so there were several hundred people on the slopes at the time. Sixty-three people were killed. This video gives a sense of the panic. This was a phreatic eruption, which happens when a volcano's hot magma comes into contact with groundwater, surface water, seawater or surface ice. The term phreatic derives from the Greek phreia, meaning well or spring. The contact, which can happen very abruptly, converts the water into high-pressure steam, which can lead to a violent explosion, sometimes without any warning. Phreatic eruptions are an important category of eruption that can affect all types of volcano, not only stratovolcanoes like Mount Ontake. The addition of water can turn even low-viscosity basaltic magma, normally associated with peaceful eruptions, into something much more explosive. Probably the best-known and tragically another of the deadliest phreatic eruptions of the past few years was the 9th of December 2019 eruption of Whakaari, or White Island, in New Zealand. Whakaari lies just offshore the North Island's Bay of Plenty and has long been a popular tourist destination for boat trips and walking tours. The volcano had been showing signs of unrest for several weeks before the 2019 eruption, vigorous fumarole activity and volcanic tremors culminating in a magnitude 5.9 earthquake on the 24th of November, but this did not stop tourist boats and helicopters from continuing to visit. As with Mount Ontake, the violent phreatic eruption occurred with no direct warning and resulted in an explosion of steam, ash and pyroclastic flows. It occurred on a Monday early afternoon when 47 people, tourists and tour guides, were on the island. 22 of them were killed, mostly by burns or asphyxiation, and all of the other 25 were injured, many of them severely. Following the eruption, investigations resulted in WorkSafe New Zealand charging multiple tour operators, government and scientific agencies under the Health and Safety at Work Act for failing to ensure the health and safety of workers and others. Volcanic gases can also be deadly, particularly when large volumes of gases are produced in a short space of time. We saw in a previous lecture how noxious gases released during a lava eruption led to Canada's worst ever recorded disaster at Sea Axe Cone, a small scoria cone in northern BC, in approximately 1700 CE. Around 2,000 people were asphyxiated in this disaster. However, the most efficient way to release large volumes of gases very suddenly is through what is known as a limnic eruption or lake overturn. Fortunately, this type of disaster only appears to affect a very select number of deep equatorial lakes. One of them is Lake Nyos, a crater lake in Cameroon, shown here. Water under high pressure, deep in the lake, can contain large volumes of dissolved gases, fed by underlying subterranean magmatic activity. At higher latitudes, these gases would dissipate peacefully as lake waters tend to turn over on a seasonal basis. But equatorial lakes, like Nyos, are less prone to seasonal turnovers. Over hundreds of years, its deep waters became a high-pressure gas storage unit, loaded with more than five gallons of carbon dioxide in each gallon of water. Lake Nyos was a time bomb. On the 21st of August, 1986, something in the lake went off. It is unknown what the trigger was. It may have been a landslide, a small volcanic eruption, or even something as trivial as cold rain falling on the edge of the lake. Whatever the cause, the result was catastrophic. The lake literally exploded, sending a fountain of water over 300 feet into the air and creating a small tsunami. Around 200,000 tons of carbon dioxide exsolved from the lake waters, forming a gas cloud that suffocated people up to 15 miles away. Of the 800 residents of nearby Nyos, six survived. In all, more than 1,700 people and more than 3,500 livestock perished. Since this disastrous event, scientists and engineers have implemented a degassing program. In 2001, they installed a pipe that runs to the bottom of the lake and allows the gas to escape at a regular rate. Two more pipes were added in 2011. A solar-powered alarm system monitors carbon dioxide levels, ensuring that, should the lake explode again, there will at least be some warning. Lake Kivu in Rwanda, one of the African Great Lakes within the East Africa Rift, is another known to be at risk from limnic eruptions. Its waters currently hold an estimated 250 cubic kilometers of carbon dioxide, as well as around 65 cubic kilometers of methane. Geologists have found evidence of massive local extinctions about every 1,000 years, presumed to be caused by outgassing associated with limnic eruptions. Two million people currently living within the basin are at risk from a sudden lake overturn. Lahars are volcanic mudflows formed out of a slurry of pyroclastic material, water and debris. Along with pyroclastic flows, they are historically the deadliest of all volcanic hazards. This footage is of a lahar generated following an eruption of Mount Samaru, an extremely active stratovolcano on the Indonesian island of Java, in 2007. In fact, the word lahar is of Javanese origin. Note that the lahar follows the existing channel of a stream, a key difference with pyroclastic flows. Like pyroclastic flows, lahars have a wide range of velocities, but they tend to be much slower overall, usually between 1 and 40 meters per second, depending on the channel width and slope, the flow volume and the grain size composition. This lahar occurred near Mount Ruapehu, a stratovolcano on New Zealand's North Island. Ruapehu is one of New Zealand's most active volcanoes, with 10 eruptions since records began in the mid-19th century. However, the particular lahar shown in this footage in 2007 was not generated during an eruption. In between eruptions, melting snow forms a lake in the volcano's summit crater. If a previous eruption has deposited a dam of pyroclastic material at the lake's natural overflow point, then the lake can become dangerously full, held back only by the temporary dam. Eventually, the dam gives way and a massive flow of mud and debris churns down the mountain towards farmland and towns below. Scientists estimate that Ruapehu has experienced 60 lahars in the last 150 years. A devastating lahar in 1953 killed more than 150 people, who died when a railway bridge was taken out by a lahar, causing a passenger train to plunge into a ravine. In response to the continued threat from lahars, in the year 2000, scientists installed an early warning system that monitored conditions in and around the crater lake. The warning system consists of a water-level sensor in the lake, a tripwire across the natural dam, and a set of geophones along the outflow channel. These are a type of seismometer attuned to the high-frequency vibrations that essentially listen out for the roaring sound of the lahar. This 2007 lahar demonstrated that the early warning system worked as planned, and vulnerable roads downstream were closed off before the arrival of the lahar. Nobody was even injured, despite the lahar being greater in volume than the one in 1953 that killed more than 150 people. The previous two videos show that lahars can form in a number of ways. Essentially, whenever water mixes with pyroclastic material. However, the worst lahars are associated with vulcanian and plinian-type eruptions, either when rainfall remobilises the ash fallout, as shown here, or when pyroclastic flows mix with snow, ice, water in a summit crater lake, or river water in surrounding catchments. Nevado del Ruiz is a stratovolcano in the Colombian Andes. Following an uptick in seismic and fumarole activity in late 1984, and a series of small phreatic eruptions, an explosive vulcanian-type eruption occurred on the evening of November 13th, 1985, sending a series of pyroclastic flows across the volcano's glaciated summit. Pumice and meltwater produced by the hot pyroclastic flows, mixed with water from a crater lake, swept into gullies on the slopes of Ruiz as a series of lahars. Flowing downstream and incorporating eroded soil, loose rock debris, stripped vegetation and water from river channels, the lahars quickly grew in size. Within four hours of the beginning of the eruption, lahars have travelled more than 100 kilometres and left behind a wake of destruction. More than 23,000 people killed, 5,000 injured and 5,000 homes destroyed. Hardest hit was the town of Armaro, 50 kilometres from the volcano and at the mouth of one of the volcano's major catchments. Armaro had been located in the centre of this photograph, and the lahars left barely a trace of it. Three quarters of the volcano's surface inhabitants died. This was the fourth deadliest volcanic eruption in recorded history, the deadliest known lahar and Colombia's worst ever natural disaster. Next, we will consider other hazards associated with volcanic ash. Our main case study will be the 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallajökull, a conical volcano in southern Iceland. The volcano is tall enough that it has a permanent ice cap on top of it. When it erupts, magma and lava melts the ice, mixes with water and results in explosive phreatic eruptions which generate large quantities of ash. After being dormant for 180 years, Eyjafjallajökull began to spew molten lava on March 20, 2010. On April 14, 2010, the eruption intensified, generating an ash plume that quickly reached an altitude of about 8 or 9 kilometres in the atmosphere. The volcano Eyjafjallajökull is located directly underneath the North Atlantic jet stream, characterised by strong, turbulent westerly winds at an altitude of 9 to 12 kilometres. At the time, the jet stream was pointing southeastwards, directly towards mainland Europe. The ash quickly moved and spread out over Western Europe, the busiest airspace in the world. Volcanic ash is hazardous to aircraft. Not only do smoke and ash from eruptions reduce visibility for visual navigation, but microscopic ash particles can sandblast windscreens and melt in the heat of the aircraft turbine engines, damaging the engines and making them shut down. The plume caused the largest air traffic shutdown since World War II. Airspace over northwestern Europe had to be shut down completely from the 15th to 23rd of April, a period of eight days, stranding millions of passengers and costing the airline industry an estimated US$200 million per day. Intermittent shutdowns of airspace continued into May of that year. Near the volcano, the effects of the ash fallout were even more severe. The sheer weight of ash collapsed buildings. All farming and grazing of livestock had to be put on hold. Locals complained of irritation to their lungs from inhalation of fine ash. Pyroclastic ash is much more dangerous than wood ash and can lead to inflammation and scarring of the lungs in a disease known as silicosis. In some volcanic eruptions, ash fallout may contribute significantly to the death toll. We learned in a previous lecture that in the 1991 Plinian-type eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines, most of the more than 800 deaths were reportedly from roofs collapsing under the weight of the ash. If you recall, heavy rainfall from the simultaneous arrival of Typhoon Yunya added greatly to the weight of the ash. We'll finish this part of the lecture by considering some of the many climatic effects of the largest volcanic eruptions encapsulated in this schematic. One common impact is acid rain, defined as any type of precipitation that is unusually acidic. The principal natural way in which acid-producing gases are released into the atmosphere are emissions from volcanic eruptions. The gases react with water droplets and steam to produce acids like hydrochloric and hydrofluoric acid. When this rains out, it leaches harmful aluminium from the soil, which is then taken up by plants, harming or killing them. Acid rain also removes minerals and nutrients from the soil that trees need to grow. Acid rain also causes utility lines, communications equipment, farm machinery, vehicles and other metal objects to corrode. Persistent acid rain causes galvanised nails or lead solder in water catchment systems to deteriorate, releasing toxic metals into drinking water. The most significant climate impacts from volcanic eruptions come from the conversion of sulphur dioxide to sulphuric acid, which condenses rapidly in the stratosphere to form fine sulphate aerosols. An aerosol is just a suspension of fine solid particles or liquid droplets in air or another gas. The aerosols increase the reflection of radiation from the sun back into space, cooling the Earth's lower atmosphere and troposphere. Although large volcanic eruptions also release large volumes of CO2, a greenhouse gas, the production of sulphate aerosols is sufficient to give the net effect of cooling the Earth. The impact is for a very limited period of time, up to a few years in the very largest eruptions. Of course, current climate models and their future climate projections already take into account these eruptions. The largest eruption in human recorded history, the Ultraplinian-type eruption of Mount Tambora in 1815, had an especially pronounced effect on the climate, both locally and globally. The eruption lasted four months and ejected so much ash and aerosols into the atmosphere that the sky darkened and the sun was blocked from view. The large particles fell to the ground nearby, collapsing buildings. There are reports that several feet of ash were floating on the ocean surface in the region. Ships had to plough through this to get from place to place. The eruption injected an enormous amount of sulphur dioxide into the stratosphere, which would have quickly spread across the world, oxidizing into sulphate aerosols. These aerosols caused widespread, long-lasting cooling of the atmosphere. Earth's average surface temperature dropped between one to three degrees Celsius for over one year. In the summer of 1816, snow fell in New England, while gloomy, cold rains fell throughout Europe. 1816 became known in both continents as the year without a summer, but the global cooling had knock-on effects all over the world. Crops were killed either by frost or a lack of sunshine, and the scarcity of food led to higher food prices and widespread famine. Because the price of oats increased, it was also more expensive for people to feed their horses. As horses were the main method of transportation at this time, the cost of travel increased. Interestingly, this may have been one of the factors that inspired a German man named Karl Drais to invent the bicycle in 1817 as a way to get around without a horse. Note that the first bicycle did not have pedals. These were a later invention. you