In this second part of the lecture, we'll look closely at one of the classic eruption case studies, the 1980 Plinian-type eruption of Mount St. Helens, right here in the Cascade Volcanic Arc. The Cascade Volcanic Arc stretches from Lassen Peak in northern California to Colshan or Mount Baker, just south of the Washington DC border. It comprises around 15 tall stratovolcanoes, as well as hundreds of other smaller volcanoes. Several of the stratovolcanoes are shown in this photograph, with Mount St Helens off to the left, and the tallest of the Cascade volcanoes, Mount Rainier, just south of Seattle, in the farthest distance. As you know, the Cascade volcanoes are fed by northeastward subduction of the oceanic Juan de Fuca Plate beneath the North American continental plate. The Garibaldi Volcanic Belt is a distinct but closely related trend of arc volcanoes north of the Canadian border in southwestern British Columbia. Volcanism in the arc began 30 to 40 million years ago, but most of the present-day Cascade volcanoes are less than 2 million years old. This plot indicates the major eruptions of the Cascade volcanoes over the past 4,000 years. During this period, major eruptions have occurred somewhere in the Cascades, on average twice per century. However, note that much of the activity at individual volcanoes is clustered into bursts of eruptive sequences. Mount St Helens has been the most active of the Cascade volcanoes over this period, and is considered the most likely of the contiguous US volcanoes to erupt in the near future, even after its major 1980 eruption. The map, like the previous photograph, shows that Mount St Helens lies a little to the west of the main backbone of the Cascade arc. The reasons for its displacement off the main trend are an area of active investigation. The oldest rocks at Mount St Helens have been dated at around 300,000 years, making it one of the youngest Cascade volcanoes. Moreover, its status as a prominent stratovolcano is probably much younger still. This photograph demonstrates what it looked like prior to the 1980 eruption. It was 2,950 metres tall, making it the then fifth highest peak in Washington state. Volcanism in the past few thousand years involved bursts of Strombolian-type lava flows and Volcanian-type pyroclastic flows, separated by dormant periods, each lasting from a few decades to up to a few hundred years. The bursts of activity are named after prominent geological field sites where these volcanic rocks can be encountered. Prior to 1980, the most recent volcanic episode involved Volcanian-type eruptions that generated a rhyolitic lava dome named Goat Rocks, as well as a pyroclastic flow high on the mountain in 1843 CE, followed by a smaller Strombolian-type eruption that generated an andesitic lava flow in 1857. Minor explosions reported in 1898, 1903 and 1921 were probably steam-driven phreatic eruptions and did not involve magma being delivered to the surface. A swarm of small-to-moderate earthquakes starting in mid-March 1980 first indicated renewed unrest of Mount St Helens. An earthquake swarm is a type of seismic sequence in which there is no clear main shock, but rather several events attain the largest observed magnitude. They are especially characteristic of volcanic seismicity, with the small earthquakes thought to be triggered by the movement of magma at depth. At this time, there was no permanent volcano observatory in North America. However, the seismicity was sufficiently strong that the USGS started to monitor the volcano more closely. On 27 March 1980, steam started to vent from the volcano in a series of small phreatic eruptions. The one shown here was on 10 April. Furthermore, the north side of the volcano was observed to start to bulge outwards by a few metres a day, eventually reaching a size of about 120 metres. This photograph, taken on 27 April 1980, shows a geophysicist surveying the bulge with a traditional geodetic instrument known as a theodolite. Nowadays, the USGS would likely use tripod-mounted LiDAR or radar for this task. The bulge was interpreted to represent the growth of an underlying magma chamber as it filled with more magma and ex-absorbed gases. On 30 April 1980, on the advice of USGS volcanologists, the governor of the state of Washington, Dixie Lee Ray, herself a prominent scientist before she became a politician, ordered a no-go zone around the volcano. This was against the wishes of logging companies working in the surrounding areas, who persuaded the authorities to limit the size of the evacuation area to a roughly 5-mile radius. As we shall see, the danger zone was much too close to the volcano. The major eruption occurred on the morning of 18 May 1980, a Sunday. We'll see later on that this was a huge stroke of luck, since it meant that most of the loggers were at home. However, there was a proposal to expand the no-go zone sitting on the governor's desk that weekend, with law enforcement ready to impose it. Unfortunately, the governor was otherwise engaged and did not sign the papers before the eruption occurred. This delay undoubtedly cost several lives. The immediate trigger of the eruption was a huge landslide that collapsed the over-steepened, unstable north flank of the volcano. The landslide itself may have been triggered by a magnitude 5.1 earthquake that occurred at the same time. Alternatively, the magnitude 5.1 earthquake may have been caused by the huge landslide itself. We'll see how the largest landslides can generate seismic waves in the next module of the course. The removal of material by the landslide abruptly released the pressure within the underlying magma chamber, resulting in a sudden exsolution of gases and a huge explosion. Because much of the northern flank of the volcano was suddenly gone in the landslide, the explosion blew out in this direction. This is the phenomenon known as a lateral blast. The blast blew huge quantities of hot pyroclastic material into the air and triggered massive pyroclastic flows that hugged the ground. The lateral blast allowed the rest of the magma chamber to empty, collapsing the summit into a caldera and feeding a vertical eruption column. These famous photographs, taken from the northwest of Mount St Helens, helped piece together what happened in the first few seconds of the eruption. The landslide can be made out in the first three images. Thereafter, everything is obscured by the huge lateral blast. From photographs like this, it is estimated that pyroclastic material in the lateral blast travelled outwards at about 150 metres per second. Another set of similar photographs, taken from northeast of the volcano, were used to simulate a video of the events. This satellite image shows how the lateral blast focused devastation strongly to the north of the volcano. Unfortunately, the devastated area extended well beyond the roughly 5-mile radius evacuation zone. However, we'll start by looking at the hazards within the evacuation zone immediately around the volcano. This shows a digital elevation model of the post-eruption landscape within the evacuation zone on the north side of Mount St Helens, captured around 30 years later with airborne LiDAR. This landscape was also crucial in volcanologists piecing together exactly what happened, and in what order. The orange areas are landslide deposits from the very start of the eruption. In places, these are overlaid by thick pyroclastic flow deposits in an area known as the Pumice Plain. The overlapping relationship confirms that the pyroclastic flows came after the major landslide. Now let's look at some of the photographs of the inner zone of devastation. This photograph was taken a day before the eruption from Coldwater Ridge, 6km north of the summit, where a temporary observatory had been set up by the US Geological Survey. This is a photograph from the same spot, taken 4 months later. The most obvious change is the huge caldera that has formed from collapse of the magma chamber. This reduced the height of the volcano to about 1.5m. The Pumice Plain can be seen in the middle ground on the left, and the hummocky deposits on the right of it are from the landslide. Here's a close-up view of some of the pyroclastic flow Pumice deposits. And this one is of the hummocky deposits on the right of it. Here's a close-up view of some of the pyroclastic flow Pumice deposits. And this one is of the hummocky landslide deposits. There were three people inside the no-go zone on the morning of the eruption. One of them was an amateur photographer called Robert Landsberg. In the weeks leading up to the eruption, he had visited the area many times in order to document the changes that had occurred. On the morning of May 18th, he was within a few miles of the summit. When the mountain erupted, Landsberg took photographs of the rapidly approaching pyroclastic cloud and flows. Knowing that he was going to die, he rewound the film back into its case, put his camera in his backpack, and then laid himself on top of the backpack in an attempt to protect its contents. Seventeen days later, his body was found in the Pumice Plain. Seventeen days later, his body was found buried in the ash with his backpack underneath. The film was developed and has provided geologists with valuable documentation of the historic eruption. This is his final sequence of photographs showing the impending pyroclastic flow. Another of the people inside the no-go zone was a photographer working for the National Geographic called Reid Blackburn. Blackburn's body was discovered the following day inside his car, shown here. The car was buried in ash up to the windows, facing away from the mountain with Blackburn seated at the wheels. He had clearly been trying to flee before he was overcome by the superheated cloud of ash and burning pumice of the pyroclastic flow. Every window of the car except the windshield was blown out. The fabric lining the roof of the car had come undone and was hanging, weighted down by ash. Blackburn's notebook showed that he had taken five shots that morning, one of them at seven in the morning when everything was totally clear, and four of them during the eruption. Unfortunately, his camera was too damaged to salvage any of the images he had shot. Unfortunately, the devastation was not limited to the evacuation zone, but extended several miles north of it. The USGS observation post at Clearwater Ridge lay at the edge of the no-go area, six kilometres from the volcano. The ridge had subsequently been renamed Johnston Ridge after the on-duty US Geological Survey volcanologist David Johnston, who was likely the fourth person to be killed. The observation post was completely destroyed and David Johnston's body never recovered. This is a photo of David Johnston the evening before the eruption at the start of his shift, taken by the geologist he had just replaced. His sacrifice was further honoured in the naming of the David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory, or CVO, which was established after the Mount St. Helens eruption, and which continues to monitor volcanoes in the Northern Cascade Range. Here are some photos of the lateral blast zone to the north of the volcano. The blast was strong enough that it could be heard in southern BC, including here in Victoria. It accounted for around 40 additional deaths, on top of those killed within the evacuation zone. Trees were knocked over within an area of 550 square kilometres. There were huge losses in the timber industry as a result. Four billion board feet of lumber destroyed, enough to build around 150,000 homes. The eruption melted a summit glacier and snowpack, feeding major lahars in surrounding catchments. The largest were those in the North Fork of the Toutle River. Flooding of the river accounted for a handful of additional fatalities, but it was not enough to stop the eruption. The power of the flow is illustrated by the huge boulders carried downstream. The lahars damaged or destroyed 27 bridges and around 200 homes. An estimated 2.3 billion cubic metres of material was deposited, just within the upper reaches of the North Fork of the Toutle River. This was the largest eruption in the world. An estimated 2.3 billion cubic metres of material was deposited, just within the upper reaches of the North Fork Toutle River. However, the effects continued downstream, where more debris was dumped into the Columbia River. This reduced the depth of its navigable channel from 40 feet to as little as 15 feet. This forced the closure of the Port of Portland, which lies upstream of the confluence with the Toutle River. Portland was at that time the fifth largest port on the US Pacific coast, responsible for 2% of all US shipping. It took several days to reopen the channel partially, and a month to reopen it fully, and nearly a year to dredge it to its previous depth. This map shows where people were killed and where known the cause of death. Of the 57 people who were killed by the Mount St Helens eruption, only three were inside the danger zone. Of the 54 outside the zone, some were quite distant from the volcano. It is clear that the evacuation zone was far too small. In particular, its designation failed to account for the strong northward directivity of the eruption. But it was also incredibly lucky that the eruption occurred on a Sunday morning. If it had happened during a weekday, hundreds of loggers would likely have perished. Finally, we'll look at the eruption column and subsequent ash fallout hazards from the 1980 Mount St Helens eruption. The lateral blast cleared the volcano's throat, allowing the magma chamber to empty almost completely. This drove a vertical eruption column for a full nine hours after the initial lateral blast. The eruption column reached a height of about 20 km, well into the stratosphere, and the plume contained an estimated 500 million tonnes of ash. Ash fallout was an additional hazard for weeks after the eruption, causing health risks from silicosis, closing several Washington state highways for two weeks and leading to the cancellation of around 1,000 flights. Ash fallout contributed greatly to the economic cost of the disaster, which is estimated at more than $3 billion, adjusted for inflation. This photo shows ash fall in Yakima, 135 km east of Mount St Helens. Here's another photo from Yakima, taken at 3pm in the afternoon. This shows ash fall in Ephrata, 240 km northeast of the volcano of Mount St Helens. Here are another couple of photos from Ephrata. This photo shows ash fall at a farm in Connell, 300 km from the volcano. In total, ash was dispersed over an area of around 60,000 km2. You can see that British Columbia was extremely fortunate that winds at the time were westerly. A southerly wind would have blown much of the ash into Canada. The major Plinian-type eruption of Mount St Helens on May 18, 1980, was not the end of the volcanic activity. Five additional Volcanian-type eruptions occurred between May and October 1980, including this one on July 22. This shows a pyroclastic flow from an eruption on August 7. After 1980, eruptions were smaller, Strombolian-type dome-building events. This photograph shows geologists inspecting a steaming lava dome in May 1981. The snow-covered crater wall in the background provides some scale. And this photo shows a lahar in 1982, caused by melting of summit snow by magma and lava. By 1990, this volcanic activity had slowed, but it started up again in the years 2004-2008, in a series of phreatic eruptions of steam and ash, such as this one on 1 October 2004. So, despite the magma chamber having largely emptied in the 1980 eruption, Mount St Helens remains the greatest concern to US volcanologists out of all of the Cascade volcanoes. We'll consider the hazards associated with three other volcanoes, Tahoma or Mount Rainier, Culshan or Mount Baker in Washington, and Mount Meagher here in BC, in the forthcoming activity class. This graphic depicts the 10 deadliest volcanic disasters in recorded history. Firstly, we'll consider which types of hazard were responsible for the large numbers of fatalities. Pyroclastic flows were the largest contributor to about half of these disasters. Pyroclastic flows were also a significant factor in the 1883 Krakatau disaster, but tsunami waves probably killed more in that event. Lahars were the main cause of events in at least two and perhaps three of these events. And climatic effects were the main cause of death in two of the disasters, including the worst of all at Tambora, Indonesia in 1815. The death toll in this event is not well known, and pyroclastic flows, lahars and tsunamis were undoubtedly significant factors too. I'd also like you to compare the death tolls from the worst volcanic disasters with those from the worst earthquakes, which we examined earlier on in the course. This graphic shows that as few as six volcanic disasters throughout human history may have killed more than 10,000 people, whereas 30 earthquakes killed more than this number of people in the 20th century alone. The pattern holds when we look at events with smaller numbers of fatalities. In the past half century, there have only been around 20 individual volcanic eruptions that killed anybody, whereas there have been hundreds of deadly earthquakes. All in all, earthquakes are by far the more dangerous natural hazard. One obvious explanation for the difference is that most major volcanic eruptions are preceded by a gradual build-up in volcanic activity, often over several days or weeks, and usually accompanied by seismicity. This gives people a chance to prepare and, if necessary, evacuate. The Volcano Disaster Assistance Programme has also made a big difference, likely saving thousands of lives since it was set up, following the 1985 Nevado del Ruiz disaster in Colombia. The programme is run jointly by the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Agency for International Development, or USAID. Its guiding philosophy is to assist foreign partners in volcano monitoring and forecasting and to empower them to take the lead in mitigating hazards at the most dangerous volcanoes through training and exchange programmes. This map gives the locations of the roughly 50 volcanoes at which the Volcano Disaster Assistance Programme has so far responded. An ever-increasing suite of monitoring techniques and early warning systems also play an important role in reducing the risks of volcanic disasters, as depicted in this graphic, although it should be pointed out that the majority of dangerous volcanoes in the United States are still not closely monitored using these methods. Gas emissions can be monitored using ground, airborne or satellite sensors. Surface deformation, which occurs when magma chambers fill up or empty out, can be detected using satellite radar or INSAR. Other satellites can pick out thermal signals as hot magma has erupted. The small earthquake swarms that accompany magma movement at depth can be detected using seismology. And higher frequency vibrations that accompany lahars can be picked up by geophones, sometimes triggering early warning systems. This completes the lecture.