For the coming module of the course, we will examine volcanic hazards. Today's introductory lecture will focus on the volcanoes themselves, a second lecture will then consider the hazards and risks posed when volcanoes erupt. We'll start by assessing the different types of magma, that is molten rock, that feed volcanoes, and the different types of material that are erupted. Later we'll see that certain characteristics of the magma play major roles in determining the style of the eruption, including whether it is relatively peaceful or dangerous. A volcano is an opening in Earth's crust through which molten rock, rock fragments and gases escape in a volcanic eruption. We'll see later on that volcanoes take a number of forms. The classic conical shape shown here is not characteristic of all volcanoes. Equally volcanic eruptions are associated with a whole suite of hazards, including lava flows, pyroclastic flows, volcanic bombs and ashfall. Moreover, some volcanoes can be hazardous even when not erupting, for example steep volcanic slopes can collapse into debris avalanches. We'll study most of these hazards in a lot more detail in the next lecture. Magma is the name given to molten or partially molten rock situated below the Earth's surface. It may sit within a magma chamber, a large body of molten rock at depth, or travel upwards along a volcanic conduit comprising fractures and fissures. Lava is the name given to molten or partially molten rock at the Earth's surface erupted through a volcanic vent as a flow or as airborne particles. Large volumes of gases are also produced. We'll look at these materials later on in the video. Every volcanic eruption is fed by a magma chamber at some depth, usually a few kilometres, below the surface. Developed within the magma are a number of chemical compounds with low boiling points, which geologists call volatiles. Water is the most abundant volatile, but carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide, methane, sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide are also usually present. These volatiles would, under normal conditions, form gases. However, pressurised by the weight of the overlying rock, volatiles within the magma chamber are kept in solution or dissolved. They are analogous to the carbon dioxide dissolved under high pressure within an unopened bottle of Coke. However, at some point, the magma chamber may become destabilised and magma will begin to rise. As it moves closer to the surface, the pressure due to the weight of overlying rock is reduced and the volatiles come out of solution or ex-solve. This is from the term ex-solution, the opposite of dissolution. The gases produce bubbles within the liquid magma, much like the bubbles produced when you open a bottle of Coke and the pressure inside is suddenly reduced. The formation of bubbles greatly reduces the overall density of the magma, propelling it upwards. This causes even more volatiles to come out of solution. In explosive types of eruption, the rapid ex-solution overwhelms the magma, fragmenting it into pieces called pyroclasts, from the Greek pyro meaning fire and clast meaning fragment. Chunks of the surrounding bedrock can also become entrained. A superheated gas jet explodes out of the volcanic vent, carrying these pyroclasts and other rocky fragments with it. In the most explosive eruptions, the momentum of the gas jet can feed an eruption column or plume, which transports pyroclastic material into the atmosphere. Surrounding air becomes mixed into the plume, heats up and expands. This reduces the density of the column to below that of the surrounding atmosphere, driving the column higher still. As the column rises further, it will eventually reach an altitude where its density matches that of the surrounding cold air. In this neutral buoyancy region, the eruption column's ascent will slow and it will start to spread out sideways. This is called the umbrella region, and it normally lies within the troposphere, the lowermost shell of the atmosphere, averaging 18km in height. However, the very largest eruption columns can sometimes ascend even higher into the stratosphere. The tallest eruption column on record reached a height of about 50km. When lava or magma cools and solidifies, atoms arrange themselves into crystals in an igneous rock. A range of igneous rock types can be produced, depending on the composition of the magma and the size of the crystals. The six basic types of igneous rocks are shown here. Almost all igneous rocks, including the six types shown here, are so-called silicate rocks, meaning that they are built around a framework of silicon dioxide or silica, formula SiO2. Different igneous rocks have different proportions of silica in different arrangements and with different secondary elements such as magnesium, iron and aluminium around them. When erupted lava comes into contact with air or water, the crystals do not have time to grow large. Volcanic igneous rocks are therefore fine-grained, meaning that they have small crystal sizes. However, magma sometimes solidifies before it ever gets to be erupted at the Earth's For example, within parts of the magma chamber or within the conduits above the magma chamber. We call frozen magma chambers plutons, and the rocks produced in this environment are called plutonic igneous rocks. These crystallise more slowly since the magma is still below the surface where it is warmer. The crystals have time to grow larger, resulting in coarse-grained igneous rocks. What about composition? The rocks on the left of the figure are mafic, meaning rich in magnesium and iron. The word mafic is a portmanteau of magnesium and ferric. Mafic rocks are produced when you melt peridotite, the main constituent mineral of the mantle. Volcanic basalt and its plutonic equivalent, gabbro, are what the oceanic crust is made of. The rocks on the right of the figure are felsic, meaning relatively depleted in magnesium and iron, but instead rich in aluminium, potassium, sodium, and so-called rare-earth elements. Recall that granite is characteristic of the continental crust, rhyolite is just the fine-grained volcanic equivalent. The centre column of the figure shows what are called intermediate rocks, that is, andesite and its plutonic equivalent, diorite, are intermediate in composition between mafic and felsic. We'll discuss how intermediate and felsic rocks form later in this lecture. Why does all of this matter? Well, magma or lava composition determines its viscosity, meaning its internal resistance to flow. Recall that low-viscosity materials like water flow easily, while high-viscosity materials like honey flow more slowly. Soon we'll see that viscosity in turn controls how explosive a volcanic eruption is. The viscosity of magma or lava actually depends on three factors, temperature, crystal content, and silica content. Hotter magmas and lavas have lower viscosities than cooler magmas and lavas. Those with higher crystal content are mushier and therefore have higher viscosities, and those with higher silica content also have higher viscosities. What is the link to the types of igneous rock we encountered earlier? Well, mafic magmas and lavas, which solidify into gabbro or basalt, have relatively low silica content, making up only about 50% of their mass. These magmas and lavas are therefore low-viscosity and runny, flowing relatively easily. Sticky magmas and lavas, which will produce granite or rhyolite, have a much higher silica content of about 70%. These magmas and lavas are therefore high-viscosity and are stickier, flowing much more slowly. Intermediate composition magmas and lavas, which will go on to form diorite or andesite, have intermediate silica content and are therefore of intermediate viscosity. Why does silica content increase viscosity? At an atomic level, the basic building block of all silicate rocks is the silica tetrahedron, shown here. It is a pyramid structure with oxygen atoms at the corners, surrounding a central silicon atom. The formula of a single tetrahedron is SiO4. However, the silicon-oxygen chemical bond is a particularly strong one, and so the silica tetrahedra like to link together, building a strong framework. Because corner oxygen atoms are shared, the overall formula becomes SiO2. Another critical difference in the spectrum of basic magma compositions is the volatile content. Volatiles, recall, are chemical compounds with low boiling points, which exsolve or come out of solution from the rising magma as pressure decreases, giving rise to gas bubbles. Water is the single most important volatile. Mafic magmas, which produce basalts and gabbros, have the lowest water content, and so relatively few gas bubbles form as the melt rises. They are also the least viscous, so the bubbles that are produced can rise and escape quickly and easily. This is what you can see in this video of the basaltic lava flow from Hawaii. Felsic magmas, which give rise to rhyolites and granites, have the highest water content, and so lots of gas bubbles exsolve as pressures are reduced. These magmas are also the most viscous, and so it is harder for the bubbles to rise through the melt and escape. Next, equipped with this understanding of how the various magma types have different viscosities and different volatile contents, we will revisit the question of why different tectonic settings give rise to varying types of volcano and volcanic eruption. Recall that at mid-ocean ridges, two oceanic plates diverge, thinning the lithosphere and allowing the underlying asthenosphere to rise close to the surface. The main constituent of the upper mantle, peridotite, undergoes decompression melting, forming mafic magma. This magma is high temperature and has low water content and low silica content. It is therefore of very low viscosity. It either cools and crystallizes slowly, a little below the surface, generating gabbro, or it is erupted as lava and solidifies as pillow basalts. Pillow basalts are produced when mafic magma is erupted underwater. The hot lava surface is instantaneously quenched, producing a crusty skin. The skin is inflated from beneath with more melt, giving rise to a distinctive pillow shape. Eventually, pressure of the melt within the pillow becomes sufficient to rupture the skin, and a new pillow starts to develop where the lava seeps out. This shows a field of ancient pillow basalts. You can see nice examples of rocks like these near Victoria, such as at Tower Point in Michoacin. By volume, mid-ocean ridges account for about 80% of lava erupted globally. However, since in these tectonic settings the lava is normally erupted about 2-3 km below the sea surface, it poses a minimal hazard to humans. Since this is a course on natural hazards, we will not discuss this type of volcanism any further. At volcanic arcs, melting occurs for a different reason. The subducting oceanic plate carries wet sediments and hydrated minerals downwards into the asthenosphere. As pressures rise with increasing depth, this water is released from the slab into the overlying asthenosphere. The addition of water lowers the peridotite melting point, such that it crosses the geotherm. The peridotite then melts, producing basaltic magma. Although the composition is similar, note that this basaltic magma is lower temperature with higher water content than that produced through decompression melting at mid-ocean ridges. In order to actually erupt, however, this magma must still rise through the silica-rich crust of the volcanic arc. As the magma rises, it comes into contact with, and melts, surrounding rocks. The melts mix together, evolving first into intermediate magmas with the composition of andesite, and after more mixing, into felsic magmas with the composition of rhyolite. These magmas have high volatile contents and high viscosities, so gases that exsult from the magma as it rises cannot escape easily. This explains why eruptions of arc volcanoes tend to be much more explosive than those at mid-ocean ridges. Volcanic arcs account for about 10% of magma erupted globally, compared to 80% at mid-ocean ridges. The remaining 10% is associated with hotspots above mantle plumes. The eruptive explosivity at hotspots depends on whether the mantle plume melts an oceanic plate, producing basaltic magma, or a continental plate, in which case andesitic and rhyolitic melts can also form. Next, we'll look at some of the forms that lava takes as it is erupted. We've already seen one such form, pillows, produced when basaltic melt is erupted underwater, such as along mid-ocean ridges. This photo shows a cross-section through an individual pillow of a pillow basalt. Its skin is easily distinguished from the fine-grained basalt making up the interior of the pillow. If you look carefully, you'll see that the skin has a glassy appearance. This is because it is glass. Glasses are defined as non-crystalline, amorphous solids generated by rapid quenching of a melt. When the lava comes into contact with cold water, it solidifies so quickly that crystallization cannot happen. The most common volcanic glass is obsidian, which is produced from felsic lavas. It has the same elemental makeup as rhyolite, but the atoms are disordered rather than ordered into crystals. Volcanic glasses are sometimes ejected in small blobs of congealed lava called pumice. Pumice is created from particularly frothy magmas, full of bubbles from escaping gases. Pumice pyroclasts are therefore most commonly produced by rhyolitic lavas, which have the highest volatile content. The rhyolitic composition is what gives rise to the white or yellow colour of the pumice. However, pumice does sometimes form in andesitic or even basaltic lavas. By volume, pumice rocks comprise about 90% cavities. This makes the pumice extremely light, so much so that it can float on water, forming pumice rafts. The following video shows an example of a pumice raft observed in the southwest Pacific Ocean following an eruption near Fiji. It looks like a rolling moonscape, a surreal stone slick so rare, so large, it turned the deep blue coral sea grey as far as the eye could see. Pumice, millions of pieces, some as big as basketballs, floating in formation off Fiji and right under a Tasmanian couple's catamaran at night. Michael came in and said, Liz, you've got to come out and see this, it's crazy. And yeah, it was dark, so we just were shining the flashlight on it and the whole ocean was sort of matte, it was just like gravel. Rocks jammed their rudder and scratched their cat. They took a sample for science and turned around. Like an iceberg, they float just like 90% under the water, 10% out. The mass is 50 kilometres wide from space. It's bigger than Manhattan Island and it's coming to Australia. So it can literally wash up from York all the way down to Tasmania. Previous shocks created similar tides. Coral hitched a ride and made the Great Barrier Reef greater. We're going to have millions of corals, for example, arriving kind of en masse. The raft will break up before Pumice washes up on Australian beaches by mid next year. Erin Edwards, Seven News. Cinders, also called scoria, are a closely related type of pyroclast. Like pumice, they are small blobs of congealed lava ejected from the vents of some volcanoes. The individual fragments are typically marble to golf ball in size. Like pumice, cinders are filled with holes from gas bubbles escaping from the magma. However, in contrast with pumice, cinders are mainly associated with basaltic and andesitic lavas rather than with rhyolites. This is why cinders are darker red or black in colour. Also, because basalt is denser than rhyolite, cinders are heavier than pumice and do not generally float. Because of their high porosity and striking colours, cinders are often used in landscaping where they are known as lava rock. Larger pyroclasts are also possible with those metre-sized or greater called bombs or blocks. Those seen in this video from the 2018 eruption of Kilauea, Hawaii, are bombs defined as large pyroclasts that are still liquid while airborne and which only solidify after landing. You can often see deformation textures from when they are spinning in flight or from the impact on the ground. Blocks, on the other hand, are solid while airborne, having already solidified before being ejected from the volcano. They usually have more conventional, rounded shapes. Pyroclasts can also be very small. Those with dust or sand-sized particles are classified as ash. Despite the small particle sizes, ash can be very dangerous, as we'll learn in the next lecture. Furthermore, the smaller the particle, the more likely it is to stay airborne. By becoming entrained within eruption plumes, ash particles can therefore be transported over much larger distances than pumice, cinders, blocks or bombs. Hence, when ash is deposited as fallout, pyroclasts are sorted into layers of different grain sizes. At a given location, the coarser particles will settle out first, followed by finer and finer grain sizes. This can be seen in these beautiful banded ash fallout deposits, which span several eruptions of the Chimborazo volcano in Ecuador. Close to the volcanic vent, ash and other larger pyroclasts can also become entrained in a gravity current known as a pyroclastic flow. Rather than being lifted upwards in a plume, the dense cloud of pyroclasts and hot gases moves downslope extremely quickly. These are amongst the most deadly of all volcanic hazards. Pyroclastic flow deposits are more chaotic, with little or no sorting of the various sizes of particles. This photograph shows an example of what a pyroclastic flow deposit looks like in outcrop. There is little hint of the high temperatures that accompanied this flow. Large volumes of volcanic gases are also emitted during eruptions. Even away from the main volcanic vents, from fissures or cracks known as fumaroles, or from hot springs. Volcanic gases are dominated by water vapour or steam, which typically accounts for more than 90% of the volatile content. Carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide, methane, sulphur dioxide, hydrogen sulphide and sulphuric and hydrochloric acids account for most of the rest. The yellow mineral deposited around this fumarole is pure sulphur, or S. Hydrogen sulphide gas is oxidised as it encounters the air, producing water and sulphur. This is poisonous and a contaminant for agricultural land. Sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide account for the rotten egg smell associated with fumaroles and hot springs, such as those in Yellowstone. Despite the dangers posed by pyroclasts and noxious gases, the regions surrounding volcanoes can be very attractive places to live. This is because volcanic minerals are rich in important nutrients. All volcanic rocks are rich in iron and magnesium, ultimately derived from the asthenosphere. In volcanic arcs, magma becomes enriched in elements abundant within the continental crust, aluminium, calcium, potassium and sodium. When volcanic minerals break down through weathering, many of these elements act as excellent fertilisers. This makes volcanic soils amongst the most fertile on the planet, another example of the sometimes fatal attraction between humans and hazards.