In this second lecture video, we'll describe the main types of volcanic eruption. They are classified according to the three Vs of viscosity, volatile content, and volume. We've already looked at the peaceful style of volcanic eruption associated with mid-ocean ridges, which normally sit at water depths of 2-3 km. Iceland sits on the mid-Atlantic ridge, yet it also lies above sea level. This is because at this location, the ridge coincides with a mantle plume. The combination of decompression melting from the mid-ocean ridge and warmer-than-usual mantle temperatures from the plume results in unusually large volumes of magma and an oceanic crust that is much thicker than normal. Because the magma has high temperatures and low silica and volatile contents, it is very low viscosity, and so gas bubbles, when they exsolve, can easily escape from the magma. Therefore, the eruptions in Iceland are generally not explosive and pose relatively little danger. This drone footage shows the 2021 eruption of Fagradalsfjall near the Icelandic capital of Reykjavik. Basaltic lava can be seen pouring out of a large fissure, forming a spectacular lava fountain that feeds a lava river. These rivers can be seen flowing downhill and then spreading out into a horizontal layer when the gradient shallows, where they then cool and solidify. Over geological time, the flows stack up upon each other to form thick sequences of rocks called flood basalts. The horizontal layering is easy to spot in cliffs and steep mountainsides across Iceland. Hawaii also lies on an oceanic hotspot, though unlike Iceland, this does not coincide with a mid-ocean ridge. Rather, the Hawaiian hotspot lies in the middle of the Pacific plate. We studied Hawaii's tectonic setting earlier on in the course. If you recall, the northwestward motion of the Pacific plate over the stationary mantle plume gives rise to a chain of volcanic islands and underwater seamounts that extends all the way to the Aleutian arc west of Alaska. Hawaiian-type eruptions are rather similar to those encountered in Iceland, with basaltic lava spilling out of fissures as lava fountains and then flowing downhill as lava rivers. The type of flow shown in this video is called a pahoehoe. This word means smooth, unbroken lava in Hawaiian. When this pahoehoe flow slows and solidifies, it forms a ropey texture that you can see examples of off to the side of the active lava river. This type of flow is sufficiently runny that it often ends up with the lava pouring into the ocean. However, not all of the magma erupted in Hawaii is this low viscosity. In this video, we can see another form of basaltic lava flow common in Hawaii called an RR lava flow, which demonstrates these somewhat higher viscosities. RR means stony, rough lava in the Hawaiian language. When this more viscous lava solidifies, it leaves a rough, jagged surface with holes through which gases have escaped. Because, on balance, the basaltic magma in Hawaii is more viscous than that encountered in Iceland, Hawaiian-type eruptions are slightly more explosive than Icelandic-type eruptions. We'll see some of the associated hazards in the following lecture, including what happens to this car. Because of the slightly higher magma viscosity, lava flows in Hawaii do not form sheet-like flood basalts in the way they do in Iceland. Instead, through eruption of the basaltic magma, lava flows into the ocean. Because of the slightly higher magma viscosity, lava flows in Hawaii do not form sheet-like flood basalts in the way they do in Iceland. Instead, through eruption after eruption over millions of years, they build giant shield volcanoes, so-called because of their gently sloping profiles and their great width compared to their height. The largest, shown here, is Mauna Loa on the Big Island of Hawaii. By volume, Mauna Loa is the largest volcano on Earth. Note the comparison with Mount Rainier, the largest of the Cascade Arc volcanoes here in the Pacific Northwest. The summit of Mauna Loa is just shy of 4,200 metres above sea level. However, the Pacific seafloor surrounding Hawaii is about 5,800 metres below sea level, so the height of the volcano from top to bottom is around 10 kilometres, taller than Mount Everest. The total width of the volcano is about 200 kilometres, about half of which is above sea level. The average gradient of the slopes of Mauna Loa is therefore only about 1 in 20. Next, we'll consider three categories of eruption that are characteristic of volcanic arcs. Each of these eruption types is given an Italian name. Southern Italy contains a volcanic arc known as the Calabrian Arc, formed by northward subduction of oceanic lithosphere belonging to the northern part of the African Plate. The first, least explosive category, is named after the volcanic island Stromboli in the Tyrrhenian Sea. The second, more explosive category, is named after a nearby volcanic island called Volcano. The third, most explosive category, is related to Vesuvius, a much larger volcano on the Italian peninsula near Naples. However, rather than being named after the volcano itself, this category is named after Pliny the Younger, a lawyer, writer and politician in ancient Rome, who described the major eruption of Vesuvius in 79 CE. This was the same eruption that famously destroyed the town of Pompeii in a pyroclastic flow. Strombolian-type eruptions are named after Stromboli. Its name derives from the ancient Greek word for round, which nicely captures the conical shape of the volcano. Strombolian-type eruptions involve low to medium viscosity basaltic to andesitic magmas, which trap more of the gas bubbles, producing mildly explosive eruptions. Stromboli has erupted almost daily for millennia. This regularity has made the volcano a popular tourist attraction. Short, energetic bursts of explosive volcanism occur up to a few times per hour, ejecting glowing bombs that reach altitudes of up to a few hundred metres and distances of up to several hundred metres from the cone. The eruptions are most spectacular at night and have given Stromboli the nickname of the lighthouse of the Mediterranean. Thank you for watching! Repeated Strombolian-type eruptions produce mounds of bombs and cinders piled up around the volcanic vent. These mounds are known as cinder cones or scoria cones after the words given to small to medium-sized pyroclasts. These photos are of an example in the Lassen Volcanic National Park in northern California, at the far southern end of the Cascadia volcanic arc. This hill is actually called Cinder Cone. The composition of the scoria is somewhere between basalt and andesite. Cinder Cone was last active in around the 1650s. This scoria cone in northern Arizona is called SP crater, shortened from shit pot, which is what its shape reminded European settlers of. It is part of an array of scoria cones in the San Francisco volcanic field near Flagstaff. Unlike Stromboli in Italy and Cinder Cone in northern California, these scoria cones are unrelated to subduction. Instead, their origin lies in continental rifting at the southern edge of the Basin and Range province. Summit craters of scoria cones sometimes hold lava lakes during an eruption. The dark rocks in the background of this photo are a lava flow which spilled out from a summit crater lava lake. The lava flow has been radiometrically dated as having occurred about 55,000 years ago. Its composition is between basalt and andesite. British Columbia contains several of its own scoria cones in three main areas, the Wells Grey Clearwater Volcanic Field north of Kamloops, the Anahim Volcanic Belt west of Canal, and the Stikine Volcanic Belt in the northern part of the province. The trend continues into Yukon and eastern Alaska. The origin of these volcanoes is still under investigation, but is not thought to be related to subduction. The northernmost arc volcanism in BC occurs in the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt, just north of Vancouver, which we will look at in the next lecture. The youngest volcano in the Wells Grey Clearwater Volcanic Field is Costal Cone. Although there are no historical accounts of eruptions, it is known to have erupted since the end of the last glaciation, around 10,000 years ago. CX Cone in the Stikine Volcanic Belt is the cause of Canada's worst natural disaster on record in about 1700 CE, although the exact year is not known. Approximately 2,000 local Nisga'a people died from asphyxiation from noxious gases that accompanied the eruption of basaltic lava flows. The next category of eruption we will consider are volcanian-type eruptions, named after the volcanic island of Volcano in Italy. Volcano itself is named after Vulcan, the Roman god of fire. Its last eruption was in 1888-1890 CE, documented at the time by Guiseppe Macaulay, the same Italian priest and scientist who devised the first earthquake intensity scale. Macaulay described the eruptions as explosions sounding like a cannon at irregular intervals. Volcanian-type eruptions usually involve antizitic or rhyolitic magma compositions, with medium to high viscosities and volatile contents. This increases the explosivity sufficiently to generate large blocks and bombs, as well as pyroclastic flows, as demonstrated in this eruption of Sakurajima volcano in Japan in 2014. Compared to the strombolian-type eruptions we looked at previously, much larger volumes of pyroclasts are erupted in volcanian-type eruptions, and more of the material erupted is older rock rather than fresh magma. However, there are also far fewer volcanian-type eruptions, typically about three to five each year somewhere around the world. Another difference with strombolian-type eruptions is that volcanian-type eruptions generate eruption plumes. One of the most spectacular recent examples was the eruption of Raikoke volcano in the Kuril Islands, north of Japan, in June 2019. This photograph of the ash plume was captured from the International Space Station. The ring of white clouds at the base of the volcano is called a strombolian. The ring of white clouds at the base of the eruption column appears to be water vapour. This was likely produced either by water vapour condensing as ambient air is drawn into the plume, or from the interaction between lava flows and seawater. Higher up, the plume spreads out in the umbrella region, where the densities of the plume and the surrounding air equalise. In this case, the umbrella region is at about 15 km above sea level. Volcanian-type eruptions produce tall, steep-sided, symmetrical peaks called stratovolcanoes, often topped with a crater. Mount Fuji near Tokyo is a classic example. The shape of stratovolcanoes is not too dissimilar to the shape of a scoria cone, but stratovolcanoes are much, much taller, typically a few thousand metres compared to a few hundred metres in the case of the largest scoria cones. The summit of Kulshan, or Mount Baker, our closest Cascadia stratovolcano, lies at nearly 3,300 metres above sea level. Tahoma, or Mount Rainier, the largest Cascadia volcano, is nearly 4,400 metres above sea level at its summit. The insides of these stratovolcanoes are composed of alternating layers of ash and lava flows. Pliny the Younger described Mount Vesuvius erupting in 79 CE and lends his name to the next category of eruptions, Plinian-type eruptions. Tragically, a pyroclastic flow buried the Roman city of Pompeii in about 5 metres of superhot ash and pumice. Largely preserved under the ash, the excavated city offered a unique snapshot of Roman life frozen at the moment it was buried. The remains of over 1,000 victims have been found, buried and mummified in the ash. The contorted postures look as if the bodies were frozen in suspended action, but are in fact the consequence of heat shock on corpses. The heat was so intense that organs and blood were vaporised and at least one victim's brain was vitrified or turned into volcanic glass. Plinian-type eruptions involve stratovolcanoes in volcanic arcs, but they differ from volcanian-type eruptions in a few key ways. Firstly, they involve the highest viscosity, rhyolitic magma, which makes them particularly explosive. Secondly, because of this greater explosivity, larger volumes of magma are ejected. Thirdly, this results in an emptying of the magma chamber beneath the stratovolcano, whose cone collapses into a large crater called a caldera, from the Spanish for cooking pot or cauldron. Caldera collapse generates even more pyroclastic material. Fortunately, only a few Plinian-type eruptions occur each century, compared to three to five per year for volcanian-type eruptions. In the last 40 years, there have been four Plinian-type eruptions. The deadliest was the 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo, a stratovolcano in the Philippines, in which more than 800 people were killed. This photograph shows what the summit of Mount Pinatubo looks like today. Before 1991, the summit of the mountain was at 1,745 metres above sea level. The Plinian-type eruption emptied the magma chamber beneath the volcano, collapsing the volcanic summit into a large crater called a caldera. This photo shows the eruption of Mount Pinatubo The Plinian-type eruption emptied the magma chamber beneath the volcano, collapsing the volcanic summit into a caldera, and reducing the volcano's height by nearly 300 metres. The caldera is now filled with a crater lake. In 1991, the initial eruption and subsequent caldera collapse generated spectacular pyroclastic flows, such as the one shown in this famous photograph. However, most of the fatalities were actually caused by roofs collapsing under the weight of ash fallout from the plume. This was compounded by the fact that the eruption coincided with the arrival of a large typhoon, Yunya. Heavy rainfall from the typhoon wetted the ash, making it significantly heavier. The typhoon also remobilised the ash in destructive volcanic mudflows, or lahars. This International Space Station flyby video of the world's most recent Plinian-type eruption of Sarichev Peak in the Kuril Islands in 2009 shows pyroclastic flows on the side of the volcano entering the Pacific Ocean. The main reason for playing this video, though, is to demonstrate another characteristic of this eruption category. Plinian-type eruptions are tall enough to reach into the stratosphere, the second major layer of Earth's atmosphere, above the troposphere. This is significant because ash in the stratosphere tends to stay aloft for much longer than ash in the troposphere and can therefore spread over much wider regions. This map shows average stratosphere sulphur dioxide concentrations in the week after the Sarichev eruption. These concentrations were measured by NASA's Aura satellite. The plume stretched westward from the volcano as far as Sakhalin Island in mainland Russia and eastward all the way to Alaska. We'll look at the hazards posed by stratospheric ash to aviation in the next lecture. The most famous and best documented Plinian-type eruption was that of Mount St Helens, a cascade volcano in southern Washington state, in May 1980. This famous series of photographs captured the giant explosion of pyroclastic material generated by the caldera collapse. An unusual aspect of the blast, which provided a major contributor to the fatality count of this disaster, was its strong directional focus towards the north. This can be seen in the photographs. This directionality can also be demonstrated in these before and after photographs of the northern flank of Mount St Helens. The May 1980 eruption completely obliterated the northern flank of the volcano. Though the western, southern and eastern slopes were plastered in pyroclastic material, they were left structurally intact. Though this aspect of the 1980 eruption took scientists by surprise, Mount St Helens is now one of the most well-studied volcanoes on the planet. Subsequent work has shown that the volcano had erupted in repeated Strombolian and Vulcanian-type eruptions over the past 4,000 years, the last in 1843 and 1857 CE. This demonstrates how different categories of eruptions can occur at a single volcano as parts of an eruptive sequence. The Vulcanian-type eruptions mark the early phase of the sequence, or the clearing of the volcano's throat. The Plinian-type eruptions mark the final phase in which the throat of the volcano is clear. The magma chamber can finally empty, collapsing the cone in a caldera. A sixth category of volcanic eruption, known as ultra-Plinian-type eruptions, is needed to account for the very largest eruptions of all. This schematic represents the volumes of material ejected in the two largest Plinian eruptions of recent times. The 1980 eruption of Mount St Helens involved about 3 cubic kilometres of pyroclastic material, while the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991 involved around 5 cubic kilometres of pyroclastic material. Ultra-Plinian-type eruptions are defined by ejection of volumes greater than 10 cubic kilometres, as well as eruption columns that exceed 25 kilometres in height. The two ultra-Plinian eruptions to have occurred in recorded history both involved arc volcanoes in southern Indonesia. The eruption of Krakatau in 1883 probably involved about 10 cubic kilometres of material. Incredibly, it could be heard as far away as Perth in Western Australia, more than 3,000 kilometres away, and Mauritius in the Western Indian Ocean, nearly 5,000 kilometres away. The official death toll from pyroclastic flows and triggered tsunami waves was 36,000 deaths. The 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora was the most powerful volcanic eruption in human history and likely involved about 160 cubic kilometres of material. The largest known eruption in geological history was of Yellowstone around 630,000 years ago. The caldera that collapsed in the Yellowstone eruption 630,000 years ago has been mapped by geologists and measures around 75 by 45 kilometres. Emptying of the underlying magma chamber and collapse of the caldera produced an estimated 1,000 cubic kilometres of pyroclastic material. If you visit Yellowstone National Park, the best place to see the material erupted is in the Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone River, shown here. The yellowish-white colours are characteristic of rhyolite. The layer of rhyolitic ash deposited from this eruption covers about half of the surface area of the contiguous United States. Recall from earlier on in the course that the Yellowstone supervolcano occupies a continental hotspot. The reason that volcanism is so much more explosive than at Hawaii, an oceanic hotspot, is that magma erupted at Yellowstone has to rise through thick continental crust. As it rises, it melts the surrounding rock, mixes with it, and takes on an increasingly silica-rich felsic composition. Yellowstone is just the latest manifestation of the hotspot, as the North America plate moves south-westwards over the stationary mantle plume. The Volcanic Explosivity Index, or VEI, is another way of classifying volcanic eruptions. The scale is open-ended, with the largest known eruption in geological history of Yellowstone given magnitude 8. It is calculated on the basis of the volume of pyroclastic material erupted and the height that this material reaches, and there is the usual inverse relationship with the frequency of the hazard. You don't need to know the details of the scale, just know of its existence, since it is sometimes cited when volcanic eruptions make the news. Eruptions with VEI of 0 to 1 occur every day, somewhere on the planet. Eruptions with VEI of 2 occur roughly weekly, while those with VEI 3 occur about once per year. VEI 4 marks one cubic kilometre of material, and these eruptions occur on average every few decades, and so on. For the purposes of this course, I'd like you to instead focus on the named categories of volcanic eruption we discussed earlier, since these better illustrate the actual style of eruption and the type of landform and hazard generated. In particular, I'd like you to recall the three Vs of magma viscosity, volatile content, and volume. Icelandic-type eruptions involve mafic magma with the lowest viscosity and volatile content. Over time, they produce very large-volume flood basalts. Hawaiian-type eruptions also involve basaltic magma with the lowest viscosity and volatile content. In addition to these three Vs, I'd like you to recall the three Vs of volcanic eruptions also involve basaltic magma but with slightly higher viscosity and volatile content. Over time, they generate very large-volume shield volcanoes. Strombolian-type eruptions involve basaltic to andesitic magma with slightly higher viscosity and volatile content. They generate small-volume scoria or cinder cones. Volcanian-type eruptions involve andesitic to rhyolitic magma with medium to high viscosity and volatile content. They generate large-volume stratovolcanoes. Plinian-type eruptions involve rhyolitic magma with high viscosity and high volatile content. Like vulcanian-type eruptions, they are associated with stratovolcanoes but they involve larger eruption volumes and the cone of the volcano collapses over the emptied magma chamber forming a caldera. And finally, ultraplinian-type eruptions involve rhyolitic magma with the highest viscosity and volatile content. Huge volumes of pyroclastic material are ejected and even larger calderas are generated. In the next lecture, we will study the hazards and risks associated with these eruptions.