In the second lecture video, we'll introduce a distinct category of water wave hazard, known as satias. We'll finish by looking at how to reduce tsunami risks through mitigation and preparation measures. This will include a brief discussion of steps you should take to survive a tsunami, should you ever witness one. Satias are a type of natural standing wave, also known in physics as a stationary wave. These are waves which oscillate in time, but whose peak amplitude profile does not move in space. Locations at which the wave amplitude is zero are called nodes, and the locations of peaks and troughs are called antinodes. This particular standing wave has five nodes and four antinodes. However, standing waves can have different numbers. For example, here is a standing wave with just one node and two antinodes. Note that this standing wave looks a little like water sloshing from side to side in a bathtub. This is exactly analogous to a seiche. Seiches are standing waves within enclosed or partially enclosed bodies of water, such as bays, fjords, lakes, or even swimming pools. The word seiche comes from the Swiss French word for swaying back and forth. Seiches can form when a basin is tilted, such as due to slip in a nearby earthquake. This pushes the water to one side of the basin. The water then sloshes back, and because of its momentum, concentrates on the far side of the basin, and then sloshes back again, and so forth. Some of the best videos of seiche waves are from swimming pools. Here are a couple of examples from Kathmandu, Nepal, in April 2015 that were caused by the nearby magnitude 7.8 Gorkha earthquake. This first video is just under a minute long. The earthquake doesn't even have to be a local one. Surface waves produced by very large earthquakes can cause significant tilting to basins, even ones long distances away. This small seiche wave in a Norwegian fjord was caused by surface waves originating from the 2011 Tohoku earthquake, around 8,000 km away. The video is around a minute and winds pushing water to one side of a basin. When the wind drops, the water sloshes back to the other side, and then back and forth until the energy has dissipated. Seiches triggered by winds are called meteo tsunamis, the term meteo as in meteorology. Meteo tsunamis are common in the Great Lakes, and in particular Lake Erie, due to its southwest to northeast orientation, which mimics the most common prevailing wind direction in this region, as well as its shallow water depth. Before we move to the next slide, note the positions of the cities of Toledo at the west end of the lake, Cleveland halfway along the southern shoreline, and Buffalo at the eastern end. This graph shows a timeline of water levels around Lake Erie during a seiche in 2003. Tick marks along the x-axis are in hours, and the graph covers a 4-day period. The y-axis is the water level in feet relative to the mean. The blue line is Toledo at the west end of the lake, the green line is Cleveland around halfway along the lake's long axis, and the red line is Buffalo at the eastern end. Starting about a day into the time series, a westerly wind pushed the water towards Buffalo and away from Toledo, with a difference in water level of around 13 feet between the two cities. The wind then dissipated, and the water rushed backwards towards the western end of the lake. The sloshing back and forth continued to the end of the time series. Meteo tsunamis in the Great Lakes can reach dangerous heights. These before and after photographs of a seiche in 2001 in Lake Superior were taken only a few minutes apart. A similar meteo tsunami was captured in Lake Michigan in April 2018. These before and after photographs were taken just 9 minutes apart. There are a few records of fatalities from Great Lakes meteo tsunamis. For example, Lake Michigan seiches in 1929, 1938, and 1954 killed 10, 5, and 8 people respectively. It is possible to prevent tsunamis from inundation through sheer brute force using structural countermeasures such as seawalls. We learned from the Tohoku case study that although seawalls were insufficiently tall to prevent inundation altogether, they did delay the inundation by several minutes in many towns and cities, allowing more people to evacuate. In response to the 2011 tsunami, Japan is currently in the process of rebuilding its seawalls to higher specifications. This is enormously expensive, but there's no doubt that it will be effective the next time there is a large tsunami. Of course, another disadvantage of seawalls is that they reduce sea views for the residents protected by them. However, less obtrusive countermeasures are available. Offshore breakwaters and underwater burns can help to dissipate wave energy, and angled walls and ditches can be used to steer waves away from vulnerable infrastructure. In Tohoku, tsunami warnings had already been triggered at the time of the first wave arrivals. To issue warnings like these, the Japanese have constructed the world's most sophisticated earthquake and tsunami early warning system known as J-Alert. On the flip side, we saw in the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami a widespread failure to alert people of incoming tsunami waves in both Sri Lanka, India, Thailand, Myanmar and East Africa, countries located hundreds to thousands of kilometers from the earthquake source. Each of these countries had more than two hours in which they could have issued an alert. Technology existed that could have triggered such a warning, but was at that time deployed only in the Pacific Ocean. Since the late 1990s, a network of sensors known as DART, standing for Deep Ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis, has been able to detect tsunami waves as they propagate across the deep Pacific Ocean. Each DART station comprises an ocean bottom pressure sensor, which is sensitive to the additional weight of a passing tsunami wave, coupled to a tethered surface buoy through acoustic telemetry. The buoy then sends data from the pressure sensor to a control center using satellite communications. There are two control centers that monitor the Pacific Ocean, one based in Alaska and the other shown here in Hawaii, both operated by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or NOAA. Following a large earthquake, these warning centers use seismological data to assess three key attributes of the event. One, did it occur beneath the sea? Two, was it shallow enough to generate a dangerous tsunami? And three, was the earthquake large enough to generate a tsunami? If the answers to all three questions is yes, then a preliminary alert known as a tsunami watch is issued. If the generation of tsunami waves is later confirmed by the network of DART instruments, or if there are any other observations of a large wave, then the tsunami watch is upgraded to a tsunami warning. Different jurisdictions around the Pacific can then use this warning to alert their populations. I'll show an example of a DART recording taken from the Gulf of Alaska on 17th of November 2003, following a magnitude 7.7 megathrust earthquake in the Aleutian Arc. The X graph X axis shows time in hours. Along the Y axis, pressure has been converted into equivalent water depth. The overall trend is the normal tide. The initial deviation from this trend is the earthquake surface wave, and the later deviation is the passing tsunami wave. This particular wave was too small to issue a Pacific-wide tsunami warning, but had an alert been issued at this time, it would have given residents of British Columbia around four hours to evacuate low-lying coastal areas. The yellow squares on this map show the distribution of DART sensors that were used to issue a Pacific-wide tsunami warning following the 2011 Tahuku earthquake. The background color map and contours show estimates of the tsunami wave travel time across the Pacific, with numbers in hours. Despite the tragedy in Japan, this can in some sense be considered a successful alert, since outside of Japan only a handful of people were killed by the tsunami waves. Offshore Vancouver Island, DART sensors are complemented by pressure sensors and seismometers belonging to the Neptune Cable Observatory, run by Ocean Networks Canada, an ocean science spin-off of the University of Victoria. These graphs show the pressure sensors picking up the incoming Tahuku tsunami as it swept across the Neptune Observatory on March 11, 2011. But the velocity of the wave can also be measured. It takes a little under an hour to pass from the Deep Ocean Cascadia Basin station to the Folger Passage station at the opening of Barclay Sound, near Oak Clewlett. Ocean Networks Canada also run a shore-based remote sensing system called WERA, standing for Wave Radar, in Tofino on the west coast of Vancouver Island. This comprises four transmitting radar antennas and 12 receiving antennas that monitor ocean current speeds in real time. Like any radar system, it works by bouncing radio waves off a remote target and using the timing and other attributes of the backscattered radio waves to characterize the target. This photo shows the receiving antennas installed at a site just south of Tofino. This colour map shows the output of the WERA system, a real-time map of wave heights extending about 80 km offshore. At this distance, the system would provide about 20 minutes of advance warning for an incoming tsunami wave or storm surge. This particular time series is from October 14, 2016, when the system first detected the distinctive signature of an abrupt change in wave velocity, potentially associated with a tsunami. In fact, there was no large Pacific earthquake on this date, so the signal was likely a small meteor tsunami associated with the remnants of a Pacific typhoon called Songda near Hawaii, and an abrupt change of atmospheric pressure as a cold front passed over Vancouver Island. When the meteor tsunami later reached Tofino, the tide gauge there measured a 20 cm wave crest amplitude. With knowledge of the shape of the coastline and the offshore bathymetry or seafloor topography, tsunami hazard maps can be used to predict shoaling wave heights at different points along the coastline. This is an extremely basic hazard map for Vancouver Island and the Lower Mainland. Computer models suggest that in the event of a Cascadian megathrust earthquake, run-up heights on the west coast of Vancouver Island could average 15 metres, with even larger values possible in inlets like at Port Alberni. More detailed local hazard maps are also possible. This is the hazard map for Tofino, showing areas that are safe from inundation, even in the largest tsunamis, in green, and unsafe areas in brown. Suggested evacuation routes are marked by black arrows. In some areas, however, it may not be possible to evacuate everyone in time for an incoming tsunami wave. This is particularly true of large cities that occupy flat, low-lying coastal plains in subduction zone settings. Padang is one such city on the island of Sumatra, about 900km south-east of Banda Aceh. Padang was destroyed by earthquake-triggered tsunami waves in 1797 and again in 1833, so the hazard is widely recognised. With around a million inhabitants and the 2004 tsunami fresh in people's memory, roads would very quickly clog up if shaking from a large earthquake was felt, as people rushed towards higher ground. It has been proposed that Padang should build a raised-earth park, an elevated open area that would be used recreationally in normal times but which people could quickly evacuate to by foot in the instance of a large earthquake and tsunami. Large buildings such as mosques could also be retrofitted to serve as evacuation structures and pedestrian overpasses could be designed to serve as additional evacuation sites. We'll finish the lecture with some basic advice for what to do if you experience a tsunami. If you happen to be in a boat and you experience a large earthquake, it's actually better to travel out to sea than try to make it onshore. These photos show boats damaged or destroyed in the 2011 Tohoku tsunami. The idea is that you want to avoid very strong currents associated with the inundation, which will quickly sweep you inland. In deep water, the tsunami wave crest has yet to break and the currents associated with it are much weaker. More likely you'll be at the coastline when you feel an earthquake, hear an alert or observe warning signs like water drawback. You can't outrun a tsunami wave so don't stay to watch but move to higher ground immediately. If you do get caught in the wave, get elevated as quickly as possible. Whenever you visit the coast, think about the safest evacuation route and recall that there can be several wave crests separated by up to 60 minutes, any of which may be the largest. Remember that at Hilo in Hawaii in the 1960 tsunami triggered by the magnitude 9.5 Chile earthquake, it was the third wave and the tallest and deadliest that killed 61 people who had returned early to low-lying areas of Hilo. After the 1964 Alaska earthquake, a tsunami warning was issued in Crescent City, California, and the shoreline was evacuated. In this example, the fifth wave crest was the largest and killed a dozen people who had returned to check damage to their homes. The lesson is very clear, don't return to the coastline until the official all-clear is given. This CCTV footage will give a clear demonstration of the importance of heading immediately to higher ground if you ever feel an earthquake by the coast. The footage is taken from the Greek island of Samos in the eastern Aegean Sea, close to the border with Turkey, on the 30th of October 2020, and the video starts just 50 seconds after a magnitude 7.0 earthquake had struck the area. The Aegean Sea is an example of a continental rift, in which the crust has been thinned just to the point that most of it lies below sea level. The rifting is accompanied by shallow crustal normal faulting earthquakes, many of which occur just below the sea. Many of the Aegean islands, including Samos, are on crustal blocks on the uplifted side of these normal faults. Because normal faulting earthquakes involve predominantly vertical motions, they have the potential to generate tsunami waves. In this instance, the causative normal fault is just a few kilometres north of Samos Island, and so the tsunami wave arrives much quicker than in most megathrust tsunamis, where the megathrust fault is usually located much greater distances offshore. This footage goes to show that it's not only subduction zone megathrust earthquakes that we should worry about. My recommendation therefore is that if you ever feel any shaking from an earthquake while at the coastline, you should assume that it is an earthquake large enough and close enough to have potentially formed a tsunami wave, and you should therefore get to higher ground immediately. We're now about four minutes after the earthquake struck, and here's the highest tsunami wave impacting the coastline of Samos. Finally, if you're ever by the ocean or a lake, and you witness a landslide or any other mass movement, also head to higher ground immediately. This beautiful footage of a local tsunami triggered by the carving of a glacier in Iceland demonstrates exactly why. The tourists escape in the nick of time. This completes the lecture.