This is the first of two lectures on water wave hazards. Tsunami waves are those generated by the sudden displacement of ocean water by various geological processes. Seiche waves are a related phenomenon caused by displacement of water in enclosed basins such as lakes or fjords. These can also be caused by geological processes or by weather conditions. We'll begin this first lecture video by discussing the basic physics of water surface waves, including the key differences between tsunami waves and normal wind waves generated by wind blowing across and shearing the water surface. These differences are critical to understanding why tsunami waves are so hazardous. We'll then consider in turn the three stages to a tsunami – generation, propagation and inundation. Then in the second lecture video we'll introduce Seiche waves and also discuss how to reduce risks from tsunamis. This will include steps you should take if you ever feel an earthquake while out on the coastline. Water surface waves are those which occur on the free surface of bodies of water. They normally result from the wind blowing over an area of the water surface known as the fetch and shearing the water. Water surface waves generated this way are simply called wind waves. In deep water, the shape of the waves approximates a sine wave. As with all sine waves, water surface waves are characterised by an amplitude – half the height difference between the wave crest and wave trough – and a wavelength – the distance between two successive crests. The time taken for the wave to move one wavelength is known as the period and is measured in seconds. Wind waves will move in the direction of wind, but the actual water molecules move in a circular motion known as a prograde ellipse. This appears rather similar to Rayleigh waves – a type of solid surface wave that we encountered in the earthquakes module – except that in Rayleigh waves, particle motions are reversed in what are called retrograde ellipses. Note how the size of the prograde ellipse in the water wave diminishes with depth beneath the water surface. The wave base is the depth at which water molecules cease to move at all. It is approximately half of the wavelength. Here is a nice visualisation of particle movement in a water surface wave. It demonstrates how the water molecules move in prograde ellipses, which decrease in size with depth. The wavelength of this wave is approximately the width of the slide. Notice how the wave base, which is where molecules cease to move, is approximately half of this distance. In deep water, therefore, the water surface wave does not touch the bottom of the ocean at all. This means there is little frictional resistance to the motion of the wave, which allows the wave velocity to be rather high. The exact velocity of a deep water wave depends on its wavelength – it is proportional to the square root of the wavelength. However, this changes when the depth of the seabed shallows to less than half of the wavelength. When water surface waves enter shallow water, with depth less than that of the wave base, the waves start to fill the seabed. Friction between moving water molecules and the seafloor slows the wave down and thus shortens the wavelength, causing the wave crests to move closer together. Reducing the wavelength in this way concentrates water and energy, and must be compensated by an increase in the wave height or amplitude. The process by which water surface waves slow down and grow taller as they enter shallow water is known as shoaling. Since the frictional resistance occurs at the base of the wave, the particle ellipses oversteepen, and this eventually causes the waves to break, normally very close to the shoreline. Here is an animated demonstration of wave shoaling. Note how as the waves approach the shoreline, they slow down, decreasing in wavelength and increasing in amplitude. There's an analogy with basin amplification in earthquake surface waves. Recall that sedimentary basins experience stronger shaking in an earthquake than bedrock regions because surface waves slow down as they enter the sedimentary rocks, and in compensation, increase in amplitude. Next we'll consider the differences between wind waves, the most common type of water surface wave, and tsunami waves, which are caused by the sudden displacement of water by geological events, such as underwater earthquakes and mass movements. Wind waves only involve the uppermost layer of the water body. The wavelength is normally a few tens of metres, up to a maximum of a few hundred metres. The wave base is therefore half this amount, usually just a few tens of metres. Deep water wind waves travel at a velocity proportional to the square root of the wavelength, normally about 10 to 30 metres per second, or about 40 to 100 kilometres per hour. Wind wave periods are typically between about 5 and 20 seconds. As wind waves approach the beach, they rise up and roll forward, the process known as shoaling, and then they break, run up the beach for several seconds, and finally withdraw. In the previous video, note how the water run-up and retreat is confined to the beach. Shoaling wind waves can reach several metres in amplitude, but each wave is a solitary unit, there is no additional water mass behind the wavefront. Tsunami waves, as shown here, are different from wind waves in several critical respects. For a start, they usually involve movement of the entire ocean water column, from the surface down to the seafloor. Secondly, this water column displacement can occur over a very large area, with dimensions of up to hundreds of kilometres in the case of the largest megathrust earthquakes. A tsunami wave should therefore be thought of as the leading edge of an elevated mass of water, as shown here. Consequently, though tsunami waves may be no taller than wind waves, they contain a tremendous mass of water behind the initial wavefront. This momentum allows the wave to run up and over the beach, and flood far inland. It is this momentum that is so deadly, even a knee-high tsunami wave can easily kill. This footage from the 2011 Tohoku tsunami, triggered by the magnitude 9 Tohoku earthquake, helps to visualise how the tsunami wave marks the leading edge of a huge volume of water. Tsunami comes from the Japanese tsu, for harbour, and nami, for wave, so called because Japanese fishermen would return home to find harbours like this one completely destroyed. Note that the phrase tidal wave is a complete misnomer, tsunamis are not related to the Earth's tides. Most tsunamis are caused by volcanic eruptions, landslides or earthquakes. We'll explore some important characteristic differences between the resulting tsunami types later in this module. In the meantime, simply understand that the characteristics of the tsunami wave depend principally on the volume of water displaced, and the length scale over which the water displacement occurs. Volcanic eruptions can generate tsunami waves in a number of ways. In this cartoon, a pyroclastic flow formed through the collapse of an eruption column triggers a local tsunami wave as it enters the ocean. The 2003 eruption of the Soufriere Hills volcano on the Caribbean island of Montserrat is a real example of which a tsunami was generated this way. Here the pyroclastic flows were triggered by the collapse of an emerging lava dome at the volcano summit. Occasionally, submarine volcanic eruptions can also trigger tsunamis. The 2009 Tonga undersea volcanic eruption is one good modern example. The volcano was in shallow water, and during the course of the eruption actually breached the surface to produce a new island, in doing so triggering a local tsunami wave. This type of shallow water eruption is known as a Surtseyan eruption, after the Icelandic island of Surtsey, which was formed in this way in 1963. Surtseyan eruptions share many similarities with phreatic eruptions, which we encountered in the volcanoes module, in that much of the explosivity derives from the interaction of magma and water. Unfortunately, this type of eruption is quite rare, and most underwater volcanism, including that which occurs along mid-ocean ridges, is not sufficiently explosive to generate tsunami waves. Recall that calderas are large craters formed when a volcanic dome collapses into an emptied magma chamber during the course of a Plinian or ultra-Plinian type eruption. When the volcano is at or just below sea level, seawater floods into the space of the caldera, generating a tsunami wave. The 1883 eruption of Krakatau in Indonesia is known to have generated a devastating tsunami that impacted the entire Indian Ocean, for which caldera collapse was likely at least partially responsible. As a result of the caldera collapse, a large part of the island disintegrated, and only the small new dome of Anak Krakatau, meaning Child of Krakatau, is now visible above sea level. Landslides are an even more common cause of tsunami waves. The landslide can be entirely submarine, such as the example depicted in this schematic, or it can initiate on steep coastal cliffs or slopes. The largest landslide tsunamis are those triggered by catastrophic collapse of steep slopes around continental margins. We'll see an example of such a landslide in the next lecture. However, most landslides involve rock volumes of less than a cubic kilometre. The water displaced by the landslide will have the same or a similar volume. Consequently, most landslide tsunamis are too small to affect entire ocean basins. Nevertheless, they can be incredibly devastating locally. This image shows an interpretation of an enormous local tsunami caused by a coastal landslide at Lituya Bay, a fjord in southeastern Alaska, in 1958. The maximum wave height, indicated by the height at which trees were stripped from the sides of the fjord, was an incredible 524 metres. Lastly, submarine earthquakes can also cause tsunamis. The most devastating tsunami waves are those caused by megathrust earthquakes at subduction zones, as depicted in this animation. During the inter-seismic period, the upper plate contracts like the loading of a spring. During the earthquake, the upper plate suddenly rebounds, uplifting the seafloor and raising the water column above it almost instantaneously. The raised water column then collapses outwards, generating a tsunami. Note its very long wavelength, as long as a few hundred kilometres. As I repeat the animation, note how on the left of the schematic, closest to the coastline of the overriding plate, the seafloor subsides during the earthquake, creating a trough in the water surface. Consequently, the first part of the tsunami wave to reach the coastline is often a trough, meaning that the sea level actually drops down first. People here will observe this as seawater withdrawing from the land, a phenomenon known as drawback, before abruptly rising again as the first tsunami wave peak approaches. Drawback can provide people with advanced warning of tsunami inundation. The volume of water displaced by a megathrust earthquake far exceeds that even of the largest volcanic eruption or landslide. For example, the area of seafloor uplifted in the 2011 magnitude 9 Tohoku earthquake was around 350 kilometres long and 150 kilometres wide. This whole area was raised several metres, resulting in displacement of a few hundred cubic kilometres of seawater. A tsunami of this volume can impact entire ocean basins, as demonstrated in this video of the 2011 tsunami wave generated in Japan, impacting the California coastline several hours later. Now we've listed the main mechanisms for tsunami generation, we'll consider how these waves propagate. The physics of tsunami wave propagation are well understood and are relatively easy to simulate. What matters most are the pattern of the initial seawater surface displacement. For earthquakes, this mimics the shape of the seafloor deformation. Secondly, the pathometry of the ocean bottom, and thirdly, the shape of the coastline. We'll consider these factors in the following tsunami simulations. This first simulation shows the tsunami generated by a magnitude 8 earthquake in Samoa in the southwest Pacific in 2009. The video is sped up, simulating 16 hours in about 4 seconds. Warm colours indicate positive sea surface heights, and cool colours show negative ones. There are a few things to note. Firstly, over the deep water of the Pacific Ocean, the waves travel very fast indeed, a little over 200 metres a second, approaching 800 kilometres per hour. This roughly mimics the speed of a jet airliner. If you took off from Samoa at the time of the earthquake, you'd land in Victoria at about the same time as the tsunami waves arrived. However, note how the wavefront is not exactly circular. This is because the wave velocity depends on the water depth. Where the Pacific Ocean is especially deep, the wave travels somewhat faster, and where the jet is a little shallower, it slows down. A consequence of the dependence of tsunami wave velocity on water depth is that tsunami waves bend slightly as they cross the deep ocean. This is indicated in this map of estimated wave paths for the tsunami generated by the May 22, 1960 magnitude 9.5 Valdivia megathrust earthquake, the largest earthquake on record. Each black line represents the path taken by a certain fraction of the wave energy. The tick marks along the line represent one hour intervals in the wave travel time. As they spread out across the Pacific Ocean, uneven bathymetry makes the waves bend. In certain unlucky areas, the seaport bathymetry acts to focus the wave energy. New Zealand and Japan are two such areas. This tsunami killed 138 people in the latter. In other luckier areas, the seafloor bathymetry defocuses the wave energy, leading to a much reduced impact. Australia and Papua New Guinea are good examples of this in this particular event. The next video simulates the tsunami generated by the December 26, 2004 magnitude 9.2 Sumatra megathrust earthquake. This event was caused by the subduction of Indian Oceanic lithosphere eastwards beneath Indonesia and the Andaman Sea. This tsunami is usually called the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami since its effects spanned the entire ocean basin. An estimated 228,000 people, nearly a quarter of a million people, were killed, most of them by inundation by the tsunami wave rather than from shaking in the earthquake. This makes this the most devastating tsunami in recorded history. Before we start the video, note how the portion of fault that ruptured, indicated by the red area of initial sea surface uplift, is very long. This earthquake ruptured a record-breaking 1,500 kilometers of the plate boundary. As the video plays, note how the wavefront traveling eastwards has a negative height due to subsidence in the overriding plate, whereas the wavefront traveling westwards has a positive wave height. Hence, people along the eastern margin of the Andaman Sea in Thailand and Malaysia observed the sea to withdraw before the devastating tsunami waves arrived. However, people in India and Sri Lanka did not observe the sea withdrawing before the tallest tsunami waves arrived. It is therefore a common misconception that tsunami waves are always preceded by the withdrawal of the sea from the land. This only happens some of the time. It all depends on the initial displacement of the seawater, which in the case of earthquake tsunamis is governed by the pattern of seafloor deformation. A final thing to consider in this video is how the west propagating wave wraps around Sri Lanka and the southern tip of India. This is due to the wave bending or refracting around the coastline. Along with the entire east coast of India, several coastal villages in western India were also devastated, even though they face away from the source of the tsunami waves. Equally, the tsunami impacted all sides of Sri Lanka with waves with heights of 4 to 7 meters. More complicated coastlines lead to even more convoluted patterns of tsunami wave refraction. This video shows a simulation of the 30th of October 2020 magnitude 7.0 earthquake off the coast of Samos in the eastern Aegean Sea. This was a shallow crustal normal faulting event rather than a megathrust earthquake. As I repeat the video, note how the Greek islands break up the tsunami wave front. In physics this effect is known as scattering. By the end of the simulation, the entire coastline of the Aegean Sea has felt some effect of the tsunami. At this point, you're probably wondering how a tsunami wave would propagate across the waters surrounding Vancouver Island. This next simulation shows what a Cascadian megathrust tsunami might look like. The still shot at the start of the video shows the initial wave condition, which reflects the co-seismic deformation of the seafloor. Note the band of blue subsidence to the east of the main band of seafloor uplift. Because of this coastal subsidence, the first wave to hit Vancouver Island will have a negative height. In other words, the first thing that most people will observe is the sea drawing back from the land. As I play the simulation, compare and contrast what happens at Tofino on the west coast of Vancouver Island, at Port Alberni at the end of the long narrow Alberni Inlet, at Victoria and at Vancouver. Time is indicated in the lower right corner of the map. As I repeat the animation, note how Tofino experiences drawback immediately and is then inundated by the first tsunami crest after about 30 minutes. The wave crest travels slowly up Alberni Inlet and Wanda Fuca Strait due to their shallow water depths, with Port Alberni inundated a little after an hour and Victoria soon after that. Vancouver is not impacted by a positive wave until well over two hours. Here's another repeat, now zooming in on southern Vancouver Island. I'll play it a couple of times. Again, note how the west coast of the island is inundated within around 30 minutes of the earthquake, whereas the tsunami wave crest takes more than an hour to reach Victoria and more than two hours to reach Vancouver. The last thing I'd like you to note is how at many points along the coastline, the tsunami does not comprise a single trough and a single crest, but rather multiple troughs and multiple crests separated by periods of several minutes up to a few tens of minutes. In this simulation, this effect is particularly evident at Maka Bay in Washington and at Port Renfrew in BC. This brings us to an important attribute of tsunami waves. Tsunamis can consist of a number of distinct wave peaks and troughs separated by several minutes. This figure shows the tsunami wave train from the 1960 magnitude 9.5 Valdivia Chile earthquake, surrounded by a tide gauge at Hilo, a town on the Big Island of Hawaii. There were eight main wave crests, the largest of which was not the first to arrive, but actually the third. The first wave was only about a meter in height, and after it had subsided, many residents who had evacuated Hilo returned to their homes. Tragically, the third wave was about four times larger than the first and resulted in 61 people drowning. As discussed earlier, the first part of the tsunami wave to arrive can either be a crest or a trough. Only when it is a trough is water drawback observed, as indicated in these photographs from Thailand in the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. Although this potentially provides advance warning of the incoming tsunami wave peak, the drawback can also draw uneducated onlookers onto the beach, with deadly consequences. Miraculously, everyone in this particular photo survived, thanks to a British school girl, Tilly Smith, who had learned about tsunamis in a science class at school and warned other holidaymakers to run to higher ground. But many people lost their lives in this way in the 2004 tsunami. The first tsunami wave crest shoals as it approaches the shoreline, and then runs up across and over the beach, a process known as run-up. This video shows some of the best footage of the run-up in the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. It is taken from Phuket Island in southern Thailand. The video is just over a minute long. Tsunami run-ups can be quantified in a number of ways. The elevation of the shoaling tsunami wave above the normal mean sea level at the normal coastline is simply known as the tsunami height. Because of shoaling, this is substantially higher than the wave height in the open ocean. As the wave floods inland, it is quantified by the flow depth. The maximum horizontal extent of the tsunami inland from the normal coastline is known as the inundation distance, and the maximum vertical elevation of the flooded land is known as the run-up height. Because of the wave's momentum, the run-up height can be significantly higher than the elevation of the tsunami wave at the coastline. Inundation distances depend both on the tsunami wave height and the coastal topography. Inundation will extend furthest inland, across coastal plains, and up river valleys. In the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, the greatest inundation distances were observed in the Ache region of northern Sumatra, the closest impacted region to the earthquake. At the provincial capital of Banda Ache, which lies on a low elevation coastal plain, flow depth exceeded 5 metres across much of the city, and the wave reached about 4km inland. This photograph shows the devastation. The only building left standing in this part of the city is the mosque. 167,000 people died here, nearly three quarters of the total for this event. This is a plot of measured run-up heights for the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. As expected, the general pattern is one of reduced run-ups with increasing distance. For example, at the northern tip of Sumatra, run-ups reached as high as 30m above sea level. In southern India and Sri Lanka, about 1500km from the earthquake, run-ups were mostly in the range 5-10m. And in eastern Africa, 5-6,000km from the earthquake, run-ups were mostly in the range of 1-5m. However, notice also the large variations on a regional and local level. For example, in southeastern India, run-ups varied from less than 1m to more than 10m over a stretch of coastline a few hundred kilometres long. In both Madagascar and Oman, run-ups ranged from less than 1m to more than 5m. These variations are too localised to be caused by focusing or defocusing of the tsunami in the deep ocean. Instead, they reflect how variations in the shape of the coastline can either funnel or deflect the arriving tsunami waves. We'll discuss this point in more detail with an inspection of inundation patterns in the 2011 Tohoku tsunami in Japan, which killed an estimated 18,000 people. This video simulates the formation of the tsunami by the magnitude 9 earthquake and its propagation towards the island of Honshu. Peak wave crests in the open ocean are thought to have been around 5m. We'll soon see that because of shoaling and funneling, wave heights at the coastline far exceeded this. In the coming few slides, we'll discuss inundation at four of the worst hit towns and cities – Kuji, Miyako, Kesenuma and Sendai. Before we study what happened, take note of the shape of the coastline, and in particular the sawtooth pattern of bays and gulfs, and headlands and peninsulas, between just north of Miyako and just north of Sendai. We'll start with Kuji. Kuji lies at the head of a small bay. The first wave crest arrived roughly 45 minutes after the earthquake, and the bay funneled it towards the town, where run-ups of 13m were recorded. In the following video, which is around 2 minutes long, you can see this funneling effect along the cliffs at the north edge of the bay. Here you can see the wave being funneled into the bay. Here you can see the wave being funneled into the bay. Here you can see the wave being funneled into the bay. Here you can see the wave being funneled into the bay. Miyako lies in an even narrower gulf, and so experienced even more of this funneling effect. It is also closer than Kuji to the earthquake source, and the first wave crest arrived about 30 minutes after the earthquake. Miyako experienced some of the highest recorded run-ups of this tsunami, an incredible 39m above sea level at one nearby point along the neighbouring coastline. The next video, which is famous, shows the wave overtopping a seawall constructed to defend Miyako from tsunamis. This video is about a minute and a half long. This video is about a minute and a half long. This video is about a minute and a half long. This video is about a minute and a half long. Kesenuma exhibited some of the strongest funnelling of the tsunami, up the narrow Kesenuma Bay, and from there up the Okawa River, one of the main river valleys along this stretch 20,000 houses in the city were destroyed by the tsunami wave, and nearly 1,500 residents were killed. The following video is about three minutes long, and in my opinion is one of the most extraordinary of all videos of the Tohoku tsunami. This video is about three minutes long, and in my opinion is one of the most extraordinary of all videos of the Tohoku tsunami. This video is about three minutes long, and in my opinion is one of the most extraordinary of all videos of the Tohoku tsunami. This video is about three minutes long, and in my opinion is one of the most extraordinary of all videos of the Tohoku tsunami. Sendai is a larger city of about a million people, situated on a wide, flat, low-lying coastal plain called the Sendai Plain. The broad, shallow-water Sendai Bay slowed the tsunami waves down, such that they reached the coastline an hour after the earthquake, compared to about half an hour at Miyako and Kasanuma. There was little funnelling effect here, so recorded run-up heights were mostly less than 10 metres. However, because of the low-lying topography, the wave was able to travel as far as 5 kilometres inland, the greatest inundation distance observed in this event. Here is some incredible helicopter footage of the tsunami inching its way across the Sendai Plain. The video is around three and a half minutes long. In return, Japan's Iwate Prefecture tsunami waves of over 4 metres were observed soon after the quake. The agency is warning that tsunami could reach between 6 and 10 metres. Tsunamis come in several waves. For those of you who are listening to this program and if you're along the coast, please do stay away and move to higher ground immediately. You're seeing live coverage of Miyagi Prefecture in the Sendai area. Japan's Meteorological Agency revised the magnitude of the quake to 8.4 from 7.9, one of the worst earthquakes ever in Japanese history. It's a 7 on the Japanese seismic scale of 0 to 7. That is the same size earthquake as the one that hit the Great Hanshin area back in 1995. Fire is breaking out, as you can see, live coverage in the Sendai area, Miyagi Prefecture, north of Japan. For those of you who have just tuned in to NHK World, a major earthquake hit Japan Friday afternoon about an hour ago, an hour and 10 minutes ago. Japan's Meteorological Agency says the quake measured magnitude 8.4. It has revised it upwards to 8.4. The agency has issued a tsunami warning for Japan's Pacific coast. In northeastern Japan's Iwate Prefecture, tsunami waves of over 4 metres were observed soon after the quake. The agency is warning that the tsunami could reach between 6 and 10 metres. We're getting reports of several buildings on fire. We do not know in regards to the exact amount of damage at this time, but we are soon to get a report from Japan's Meteorological Agency. They're setting up to find out the extent of the damage. All transportation systems in Tokyo, as well as northern Japan, has been stopped. Airports closed in Tokyo, Sehaneda, as well as Narita Airport. A great earthquake has hit Japan. Magnitude 8.4 in northern Japan. The agency has been warning a tsunami ever since the quake, and a tsunami has hit the Miyagi-Senda area as our live helicopter camera crew are up covering and showing you exactly what is going on at this time. Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary Tetsuro Fukuyama told reporters on Friday that the governor of Miyagi Prefecture, where the earthquake has hit hardest, has asked the government to send self-defence force units to deal with the situation and aid the situation. Defence Ministry officials say self-defence force personnel are currently contacting local governments and related agency to assess the extent of the damage. This map and graph show the distribution of run-up heights along the eastern Honshu coastline in the 2011 tsunami. It confirms how the highest run-ups are associated with the Sawtooth coastline from just north of Miyako to just north of Sendai. Because tsunami run-up heights are strongly controlled by the shape of the coastline, many of the towns that were hit hard by the 2011 tsunami have records of large waves from previous tsunamis. We'll now compare run-up heights in the 2011 tsunami with those recorded in three previous tsunamis. The 1896 and 1933 tsunamis were, like 2011, caused by megathrust earthquakes along the Japan Trench, though their estimated moment magnitudes were somewhat smaller, at about 8.5. Because of the lack of preparedness at the time, the 1896 event was even more deadly than the 2011 tsunami, killing an estimated 22,000 people. The 1960 tsunami was triggered by the magnitude 9.5 Valdivia megathrust earthquake in Chile. All three of these earlier tsunamis mimic the general pattern of run-up heights observed in 2011, with the greatest run-ups along the crenulated coastline between just north of Miyako and just north of Sendai.