In today's lecture, we will be taking a look, firstly, back in deep time to the formation of the Earth, and then secondly, below our feet at what our planet is made of and how these materials behave. We will see that Earth's evolution and structure are closely connected. We will also discuss two so-called space hazards that stem from our planet's place within the solar system. In this first lecture video, we will look at how Earth formed and when it formed, both of which we know about through the study and dating of ancient meteorites. Since this is a hazards course, we will also look at the dangers posed by meteorites today. The solar system coalesced from a rotating cloud of dust and gas, formed during a supernova, a large explosion that takes place at the end of a star's life cycle. The gas cloud contracts and collapses under its own gravity to form a proto-planetary disk, and later a planetary system. This process is thought to take somewhere between 50 and 100 million years. We can see snapshots of this process in other parts of our own galaxy. The Crab Nebula is an example of a very young gas and dust cloud in the Taurus constellation, formed from a supernova recorded by Chinese astronomers in 1054 AD, and which was visible from Earth for about two years. HL Tauri, also in the Taurus constellation, is a proto-planetary disk thought to be about one million years old. The process by which planets form out of a proto-planetary disk is called accretion. Accretion occurs when particles accumulate by gravitational attraction, first into small bodies called planetesimals, with dimensions of several kilometres, and then into larger proto-planets, the predecessor of today's planets. These collisions generated intense heat. As temperatures rose from these impacts, proto-Earth started to melt and differentiate. Differentiation is the process of separating out different chemical constituents of the proto-planet into distinct compositional layers. In proto-Earth, molten iron and other heavy elements were pulled to its centre, forming a core. Lighter silica or SiO2-rich rocky material floated upwards to form an outer mantle, initially comprised of liquid magma. During melt migration, friction between the sinking iron and the rising rocky material generated yet more heat. We call the heat generated as proto-Earth accreted and differentiated primordial, meaning existing at the beginning of time. Earth's accretion and differentiation are recorded in meteorites, many of which are fragments of proto-planets and planetesimals. It can be difficult to distinguish a meteorite from an Earth rock by appearance alone in most parts of the world, since many meteorites look similar to rocks found on Earth. However, there are some special places where they're much easier to identify, namely deserts. In sandy deserts with large open regions of sand and few rocks, dark meteorites stand out clearly. Similarly, meteorites can be much easier to spot in cold, icy deserts, such as the frozen wastes of Antarctica. The lower photograph shows a meteorite spotted by NASA's Curiosity rover on the surface of Mars. There are different classes of meteorite which provide important clues about the solar system's and Earth's early history. Stony meteorites are a type made of 75-90% of silica-based minerals and 10-25% of nickel-iron alloy. 86% of meteorites found on Earth are a type of stony meteorite called a chondrite, named after chondrules or bubbles that form the texture of these rocks. The bubbles indicate that these rocks have never been molten. They represent primitive material from before planetary differentiation. These are the oldest rocks in the entire solar system. They are also quite informative because their composition mimics the bulk composition of Earth and of the other rocky planets, Mars, Venus and Mercury. A chondrites are another type of stony meteorite, but these lack chondrules. These meteorites originate from the differentiated outer silica mantle of large planetesimals. The next major class of meteorites are stony iron meteorites. These contain roughly even amounts of silicates and nickel-iron alloy. They are thought to originate from the boundary region between the outer silica mantle and the inner metallic core of differentiated planetesimals and protoplanets. Their beautiful texture demonstrates how molten iron and molten silica are immiscible, meaning that they do not form a solid. Later, we will see further evidence for this immiscibility in the interior structure of modern Earth. The last major class of meteorites are iron meteorites. These are made of nickel-iron alloy and originated in the cores of planetesimals and protoplanets. The iron found in these meteorites was one of the earliest sources of usable iron available to humans before the development of smelting at the beginning of the Iron Age. Each of the different classes of meteorites therefore signifies part of the process by which Earth and other rocky planets formed. Chondrites represent primitive material in the protoplanetary disk. Achondrites represent the molten, differentiated outer mantle of protoplanets. And stony iron and iron meteorites represent the differentiated cores of these bodies. Soon, we will show how this information provides our best estimate of the age of the Earth. But first, a little scientific history. The physicist William Thomson, better known as Lord Kelvin, was one of the first to provide robust scientific estimates for the age of the Earth. He did so by assuming that Earth He did so by assuming that Earth cooled through conduction from a uniformly hot sphere of molten rock and by considering the rate of heat loss from Earth's surface. To get a feel for the physics at hand, one can carry out a simple thought experiment. Imagine what would happen if you took a well-cooked Thanksgiving turkey, piping hot from the oven, and immediately placed it in a freezer. Initially, the turkey would be at the same temperature throughout. Only a very thin skin would immediately take on the temperature of the freezer. But soon, the outer layers of turkey meat would cool as heat diffused outward, even though the center retained its initial oven-like temperature. Eventually, of course, everything, including the stuffing, would cool off. That is, the temperature inside your turkey would depend both on the distance from the surface and on the time elapsed. Kelvin put this experiment to test on the Earth. He assumed that the Earth started off at a temperature of 7,000 degrees Fahrenheit, a little shy of 4,000 degrees Celsius. He then modeled what the geothermal gradient, that is, the profile of temperature with increasing depth, would look like after 10 million years, 100 million years, 1,000 million or 1 billion years, and 10,000 million or 10 billion years. As you can see, at just 10 million years, most of the Earth is still very hot, except for a thin skin, like the piping hot turkey just placed in the freezer. At 10 billion years, the Earth has cooled off substantially throughout. You can see that the geothermal gradient at Earth's surface is different for the four different ages. Scientists working at the time could estimate this by descending into deep underground mines and taking the temperature of the rocks. Kelvin quotes a geothermal gradient of 150th of a degree Fahrenheit per foot, plotted here as a dashed line. You can see that this observed temperature trend agrees best with the modeled line for an Earth age of 100 million years. Kelvin therefore estimated the Earth's age to be about 100 million years, which was far younger than geologists of the time imagined. However, Kelvin had assumed that the Earth was rigid, homogenous, and contained no other sources of energy than primordial heat. In 1895, John Perry, a professor of engineering who had at one time served as Kelvin's assistant, realized that the first of these assumptions was invalid, and that heat transfer by convection, not conduction, could keep Earth warmer for much longer. He was able to reconcile measurements of the geothermal gradient with the Earth being billions of years old by considering the planet to have a convecting fluid mantle overlaid by a relatively thin lid of solid rock. He modeled what the geothermal gradient would look like as a function of Earth's age. Plotted here is the expected curve from homogenous Earth, as Kelvin had assumed. Calculations using a convecting mantle with a 50 kilometer lid produce a different shaped curve. Overlaying estimates for the geothermal gradient, we see that Kelvin's model is compatible with ages between about 20 million and 100 million years, whereas Perry's model is compatible with ages as great as two to three billion years. This led to a revised estimates of Earth's age of two to three billion years. However, we now know that Perry's estimate was still too young, and that this is because he had failed to account for radioactivity, discovered a year later in 1896 by Henri Becquerel. Radioactive decay is the spontaneous disintegration of an original parent nucleus into a different daughter nucleus, and is accompanied by the emission of electromagnetic radiation. Certain elements that are common in silicate rocks, especially uranium, thorium, and potassium, decay in this way. The radiation emitted during this decay is an additional source of heat within the Earth, along with primordial heat, which was not accounted for by either Kelvin or Perry. The rate at which this process occurs is described by the half-life, the time required for half of the nuclei in a sample of a specific isotope to undergo radioactive decay. Different radioactive elements have different half-lives, which can be measured. Radiometric dating exploits the known half-lives of radioactive elements to date the formation of rocks. It is by this technique we now determine the age of the Earth. Earth was dated using radiometric dating for the first time in 1956 by measuring products of the uranium decay series, isotopes of lead, in the Canyon Diablo meteorite, an iron meteorite from the asteroid that formed Meteor Crater in Arizona, shown here. This radiometric dating placed Earth's age at 4.55 billion years, an estimate that has remained essentially the same ever since. Since then, radiometric dating techniques have become more precise and have been applied to more and more meteoritic material. Dating of chondrite meteorites indicates that the solar system formed 4.56 billion years ago. Dating of achondrites, stony iron, and iron meteorites indicates that the planetary accretion and differentiation may have taken only about 30 million years. Radiometric dating of terrestrial volcanic rocks is what gives us the absolute dates on the geological time scale, which was originally established and named on the basis of fossils. Note that the scale in this graph is highly non-linear. For 80% of geological time there were no animals, and humans have existed for just 0.004% of geological time, around 200,000 years. The radioactive isotopes potassium-40, uranium-235, and 238, and thorium-232 are all common in the mantle and are the source of most of Earth's radioactive heat. These curved lines, marked with each isotope's chemical symbol and half-life, show how their contributions towards radiogenic heat production within the mantle are thought to have slowed through Earth's history, as their populations have thinned. The sum of these lines gives the total heat flow from all radioactive decay in the mantle. We can surmise that the Earth's mantle was much hotter when it formed than it is today. Radioactivity is in fact a form of geological hazard, though it's not one we will cover in detail in this course. We are exposed to naturally occurring radioactivity through radioactive elements in soil and rock, in food, drink, and air, as well as from cosmic rays from space. Large doses of ionising radiation can damage human tissues, as well as from cosmic rays from space. Fortunately, in most places, natural doses are smaller than what is considered safe. But around the world, there are many areas with high natural background radiation, where annual radiation doses are several times higher than the United Nations dose limit for radiation workers. Cornwall, the southwestern tip of Great Britain, is one such place. Note that the background radiation, shown here on the left, correlates strongly with geology, shown on the right, and specifically with granitic rocks, plotted in red, which have particularly high uranium concentrations. Radon, a radioactive gas, is part of the uranium decay series. The radiation exposure due to cosmic rays is very dependent on altitude, and slightly on latitude, so people who travel by air increase their exposure to this radiation. Having just discussed meteorites, we'll now introduce the first of our so-called space hazards, impact events. Impact events are collisions between the Earth and extraterrestrial asteroids, comets, or their fragments. Considering the opposing momentums, mass times velocity of both the Earth and the impacting object, the amount of energy released in these collisions is absolutely enormous. We see evidence of this energy release in the spectacular craters formed on the planet's surface. Asteroids are stony and or metallic bodies, too small to be considered planets themselves. In our solar system, most asteroids are orbiting the Sun in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, or in the Kuiper belt beyond Neptune. Asteroids can vary hugely in size, measuring from hundreds of meters to hundreds of kilometers in diameter. In the asteroid belt, the largest objects are Ceres, almost 1,000 kilometers in diameter, followed by Vesta, Pallas, and Hygieia, all several hundreds of kilometers wide. Together, these four asteroids make up about half of all of the mass of the belt. Compared to the Moon, these asteroids are still rather small. The total mass of the asteroid belt is only about 4% of that of Earth's Moon. The objects in the Kuiper belt are even larger than those in the asteroid belt, with several spanning over 1,000 kilometers in diameter. Due to their size, these asteroids are known as dwarf planets, a group that includes, for example, Pluto. The asteroid and Kuiper belts were likely created from the remnants of several ancient planets that collided and disintegrated. Collisions between objects in these belts can dislodge asteroids from their current paths into intersecting orbits with other planets, including the Earth. The other class of objects that may impact the Earth are comets. These normally orbit the Sun around a highly elliptical path. When in the inner solar system, that is closer to the Sun than Jupiter, the Sun's radiation vaporizes the volatiles in the comet nucleus, which stream away from the comet as a tail that points away from the Sun. Most comets originate from the Kuiper belt or the distant Oort cloud. Comets are similar to asteroids in that their bodies normally orbit the Sun, composed of rock and dust, but different in that they also contain ice from frozen gases, for example, ices of water, methane, and ammonia. They can vary greatly in size. Comets have been discovered with diameters from just 100 meters to over 60 kilometers. Comet tails can extend huge distances, up to one astronomical unit, or 150 million kilometers, the distance between the Earth and the Sun, as is shown here in this photo of the comet Lovejoy that passed the Earth in 2015. The Earth is constantly bombarded with this extraterrestrial material, but most of it is so small that we don't notice it at all. The average return period of an impact event is proportional to the size of the impactor, or put another way, the frequency is inversely proportional to size, similar to other natural hazards. The smallest objects are classed as cosmic dust, which continuously drifts down gently through the atmosphere. What are often called shooting stars are objects about one millimeter in diameter. The visual effect is caused by these objects burning up in the atmosphere due to friction. Bodies over 100 meters in diameter can pass through atmosphere without completely burning up. These occur on average every 10,000 years or so. So-called catastrophic events caused by impactors with diameters of one kilometer or larger, and large enough to affect the entire globe, happen on average about every 500,000 years. There are about 190 confirmed impact craters worldwide. This doesn't sound like a lot considering the age of the Earth, and that is true. There are far fewer meteorite craters visible on Earth than have been found on the Moon or on Mars. This is because, unlike the Moon and Mars, the Earth's surface is constantly changing, and older crust is erased by erosion and tectonics. In North America, there are around 60 confirmed impact craters, many of these located in Canada. A spectacular example is the Manicougan crater in Quebec, shown here on a satellite image. This was formed 214 million years ago from the impact with a meteorite roughly five kilometers in diameter. The resulting crater is called the Manicougan crater, and is about 100 kilometers wide. This, though, isn't Canada's largest crater. That would be the crater in Sudbury, Ontario. This impact took place 1,850 million years ago, or 1.85 billion years ago, from an impactor 10 to 15 kilometers in diameter. Debris from the collision was scattered over a huge area, with rocks and debris scattered over a huge area, with rock fragments found as far away as Minnesota, over 800 kilometers from Sudbury. The impact crater was around 150 kilometers wide before being distorted by tectonic processes. Because of the distortions, the basin was not recognized as an impact crater until 1970. Analysis of the concentration and distribution of elements in the impact area also indicate that a comet, rather than an asteroid, most likely caused the crater. The large collision filled the crater with magma from the mantle, containing nickel, copper, platinum, palladium, gold, and other precious metals. The Sudbury area is one of the world's largest suppliers of nickel and copper ore as a result. In modern times, there have not been any meteorite impacts the size of Sudbury, but some significant impact events have taken place, the most famous in Tunguska, in Russia, just over a century ago. On 30 June 1908, a massive fireball was observed in the sky, followed by an airburst explosion. This was heard over 1,000 kilometers away, and people as far as 500 kilometers away were knocked off their feet. Nobody lived in the area, so there are no known fatalities. Because of the remoteness, there was not initially any further investigation. However, in 1927, an expedition discovered that the event had flattened 2,000 square kilometers of forest, with many felled trees charred on one side. But the expedition did not find any impact crater. A second expedition in 1958 collected globules of once molten metal and rock encased in tree resin, which determined that a stony meteorite or comet of 30 to 50 meters diameter, falling with a speed of 15 kilometers a second, exploded over the area at an elevation of about 8 kilometers. The blast was equivalent to 10 to 15 megatons of TNT, roughly 1,000 times more powerful than the atomic bombs at the end of World War II. A similar event in a more populous place could destroy a major metropolitan area. A more recent example is from 2013, also in Russia. On the 15th of February at about 9.20 a.m. local time, a meteor was observed over the southern Ural region. It fell with a speed of 19 kilometers per second. The light from the meteor was brighter than the sun and visible up to 100 kilometers away. Many people felt intense heat from the fireball. Due to its high velocity and shallow angle of atmospheric entry, the object exploded in an airburst over the town of Chelyabinsk at a height of about 30 kilometers. The explosion generated a bright flash, producing a hot cloud of dust and gas, and many surviving small fragmentary meteorites, as well as a large shock wave that you'll see in the next video. The object was undetected before its atmospheric entry because its incoming path was close to the sun. With an estimated mass of about 12,000 to 13,000 tons and measuring about 20 meters in diameter, it is the largest known object to have entered Earth's atmosphere since the 1908 Tunguska eruption. There have been five major and several minor mass extinction events during the 541 million year-long Phanerozoic era. The causes are still debated, but asteroid impacts are implicated for at least two of these. In the late Devonian period, around 30 percent of animal families and three quarters of all species were lost due to a prolonged series of extinction pulses. These pulses were caused by a combination of impact events and extensive volcanism, causing changes in sea level and climate. The impacts occurred around 365 million years ago in Alamo, south-central Nevada, creating an estimated 190 kilometer wide crater, and also in Woodley, western Australia, causing a crater 120 to 160 kilometers in diameter. At the end of the Cretaceous period, 50 percent of animal families and 75 percent of all species became extinct. Rapid climate change triggered by volcanic gases, together with the Chicxulub impact event, are believed to be the cause. In the geological sedimentary rock record, the boundary between the Cretaceous and Tertiary periods is usually very distinct. Here you can see it in the sedimentary layers of the Badlands of the Albertan Plains. The boundary is often marked by a thin clay layer with high levels of iridium, an element rare on Earth but common in meteorites. The Cretaceous is the lower white chalk below the rusty orange bed. The K-T boundary is the orange bed itself, and the Tertiary period starts with the greenish clay beds that gradually shift back into white chalk. The site of the meteorite impact causing this extinction event was first resolved in 1990 from the distribution of melted rock globules, shocked quartz, and tsunami deposits. These indicated an impact site on the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. A later 3D map of local gravity and magnetic field variations reveals the Chicxulub crater, now buried by sediment, is 180 kilometers wide. Asteroid impact avoidance refers to proposed methods to divert away from the Earth near-Earth objects, or NEOs, on a potential collision course with our planet. This animation depicts a map of the positions of around 18,000 potentially dangerous near-Earth objects identified over the past 20 years.