In the second part of the lecture, we'll explore the different types of seismic wave before learning about how we determine an earthquake's location. When a fault slips in an earthquake, it releases elastic strains stored in Earth's crust as seismic waves. There are two basic categories. The first category is surface waves, which travel around the surface of the Earth, much like ripples over the surface of a pond. The second category is body waves, so-called because they pass through the body of the Earth. There are two important observations I'd like you to draw from this simple cartoon. Firstly, you can see that body waves are faster than surface waves. Or put another way, body waves reach a point distant from the earthquake sooner than surface waves do. Secondly, you will observe that the path of the body wave within Earth's interior forms a curve. It plunges steeply at first, then flattens out at depth, and finally surfaces at a steep angle again. The explanation for both these observations is related to how material properties change with depth in the Earth. Silicate rocks become denser and stiffer with increasing depth and pressure. Seismic wave velocities depend on the stiffness of the material that the waves travel through. Therefore, waves in the deep mantle travel fastest, waves in the upper mantle travel slower, and waves at the surface travel slower still. Surface waves are therefore slowest, since seismic wave velocities are slowest near the surface. These waves typically travel at 2 to 3 kilometers per second. Body wave velocities are faster than this, even at shallow depths, and speed up further with increasing depth in the mantle. On the graph, two wave velocities are given, one labelled P wave and one labelled S wave. These are the two types of body wave, which we will look at in detail shortly. The bending of body waves occurs because of refraction, as the waves pass through contrast in stiffness and seismic velocity. This is analogous to the way light bends at the surface of a swimming pool, as it passes from dense water to light air, or vice versa. The refraction of seismic waves is described by Snell's law, just like for light. Let's look in more detail at the two types of body wave, starting with P waves. P here stands for primary, since these are the fastest waves, always arriving first at any given location. The animation shows a P wave passing from left to right through a gridded block representing material in Earth's interior. Note how individual particles within the block move and are deformed as the wave passes through. The particles move in the same direction as that of the wave, forward and then backward. The particles are also compressed as the wave passes through. P waves are therefore also called compressional waves. Sound waves are another type of compressional wave, to which P waves are equivalent. Just as sound waves travel through fluids, like air and water, P waves can travel through liquids, like the molten iron outer core. The second type of body wave is the S wave. S stands for secondary, since these are the second fastest wave, always arriving second at any given location. Again, look closely at the particles within the block as the S wave passes from left to right through the solid Earth interior. You will see that they move side to side, perpendicular to the direction the wave travels in. These particles are also sheared as the wave passes through. S waves are therefore also short for shear waves. Unlike compressional waves, shear waves cannot pass through fluids, such as the liquid outer core. Just as there are two types of body wave, there are also two types of surface wave. The first type is called the love wave, after a British mathematician, Augustus Love. The animation shows a love wave passing from left to right across Earth's surface. Notice how the particles move from side to side, perpendicular to the direction the wave travels in. This makes love waves a little similar to shear body waves. However, notice also that particles at the surface move more than those at depth. This reflects that surface waves travel around the surface of the Earth, not through the interior. The second type of surface wave is the Rayleigh wave, named after Baron Rayleigh, a British physicist. The animation shows a Rayleigh wave passing from left to right across Earth's surface. The particle motion here is first forward in the direction of wave propagation, then upward, then backward, and then downward, a pattern known as a retrograde ellipse. Rayleigh waves are also sometimes called ground roll for obvious reasons. Like the love wave, particles at the surface move more than those at depth, reflecting that these are surface waves traveling around the surface of the Earth. The ground vibrations caused by passing seismic waves are recorded by highly sensitive instruments known as seismometers. Traditionally, these involve the weight or pendulum hanging by a wire from a frame. The frame is connected to a fixed base on the ground. Any movement of the ground moves the frame, but the weight tends not to move because of its inertia. By measuring the relative movement between the frame and the weight, the motion of the ground can be determined. The seismometer is attached to a recording device, which traditionally comprised a rotating drum covered in a roll of paper. A timing device would add small tick marks at set intervals to the paper. Nowadays, the recording and timing is done digitally. The seismometer instrument and the attached recording and timing devices are collectively known as a seismograph, or alternatively, a seismic station. The actual record of the ground vibrations has a third name, a seismogram. The seismogram is the output of the seismograph. It is a graphical representation of ground displacement at a given location as a function of time. Seismograms typically record motions along three Cartesian axes, X, Y, and Z, with the Z axis perpendicular to Earth's surface and the X and Y axes parallel to the surface. In a raw seismogram recording, the X and Y axes normally point east and north. However, once the earthquake has been located, more on that later, seismologists like to rotate the horizontal coordinate system so that one horizontal axis points towards the earthquake and the other lies perpendicular to that direction. This is what is actually shown in this real example of a three-component seismogram. The radial axis points horizontally along the path between the earthquake and seismometer, and so the radial component of the seismogram records horizontal push and pull motions along this path. The transverse axis is perpendicular to the radial axis. The transverse component of the seismogram therefore records horizontal side-to-side motions caused by the earthquake. We'll now see that this coordinate transformation helps us to distinguish the different types of seismic wave. Let's look first for the P wave. P waves are body waves which follow arcuate paths within Earth's interior and therefore approach the seismometer roughly from below. Since particle motion is in the wave propagation direction, they mostly excite the vertical component of the seismogram. This is therefore the easiest place to spot them. P waves are also the first wave to arrive. S waves are also body waves approaching the surface at steep angles. However, their particle motion is perpendicular to the wave propagation direction. S waves therefore mostly excite the radial component of the seismogram, which is where they are best identified. Surface waves are slower than body waves and so appear later on in the seismogram. The lateral love waves involve side-to-side motions and therefore appear on the transverse component of the seismogram. The rolling Rayleigh waves involve particle motions in a retrograde ellipse. They therefore excite the vertical and radial components of the seismogram. Now that we have identified the four different types of seismic wave on this real seismogram, there is one very clear observation we can make. Surface waves have much larger sizes or amplitudes than body waves. This makes surface waves a lot more damaging. Fortunately, they are also slower than body waves, which means that if the body waves can be detected and analysed extremely quickly, it is possible to alert people before the damaging surface waves arrive. As we will see a little later on, this is the principle behind earthquake early warning systems. This video will show how the passage of seismic waves across North America from a distant earthquake, in this case the March 2011 magnitude 9.0 Tohoku earthquake in Japan. The map shows a seismic array, another name for a dense network of seismic stations. In this case, the densest part of the array is in the American Midwest. Each seismograph in the array is represented initially by a small white circle. As the seismic waves pass through, notice the colour of the seismographs change. Red means that the station is uplifting and blue means that it is subsiding. Small bars attached to the circles show horizontal motions. The seismogram shown at the bottom is from a station in Kansas, coloured yellow on the map. The timing on the Kansas seismograph will be given by a vertical red bar. When I start the video, in a second, look closely for the different types of seismic waves as they arrive across the array. The video will be sped up by a factor of around 100. The faint bands of blue and pink crossing the array now are the P waves. The earliest side-to-side motions are S waves. Now you start to see the slower surface waves. Here are the side-to-side love waves and then the forward and backwards Rayleigh waves. We'll keep watching and then repeat the video one more time. Soon you'll start to notice waves approaching not from the northwest, but from the opposite southeast direction. Here they come. These are seismic waves that have travelled the other way around the world, not across and underneath the Pacific Ocean, but across and underneath Southeast Asia, the Indian, Southern and South Atlantic Oceans, and then across South America. Let's watch from the beginning one more time. Here are the primary P waves coming through with the faint colours. Now you start to see the shear waves. Now we see the love waves and finally the Rayleigh waves. One thing that might have puzzled you is why waves from an earthquake in Japan encroach from the northwest when Japan lies due west of America. This is because the shortest path between Japan and North America is a great circle which passes over the northern Pacific Ocean. This is the same path you would take if you flew to Japan in an airplane. This is a similar video, but it's a little bit different. This is a similar video of seismic waves from the 2010 El Mio Cucupa earthquake in Mexico. This time the seismogram at the bottom belongs to a station coloured yellow in Colorado. Focusing on this densest part of the array, we will see how the P waves, S waves, love waves and Rayleigh waves arrive in very quick succession. They are less spaced out than in the Tohoku earthquake video because this Mexican earthquake is a much shorter distance away from the array in America. We'll start the video now. P waves, S waves, love waves, Rayleigh waves. Let's do that one more time from the beginning, focusing on Colorado. P waves, S waves, love waves, Rayleigh waves. The next video, which I'll start in a minute, shows an unusual recording of an earthquake made by a high-rate GPS instrument in Kathmandu, Nepal. We came across GPS stations in the previous video in our look at slow, steady inter-seismic strain in California. This particular instrument in Kathmandu is set up to record rapid changes in motion with a new position determined by the seismic waves. A graph will appear showing the changing position of the GPS instrument in north and east coordinates as the seismic waves pass by. This contrasts with a traditional seismograph, which records the motion of a pendulum relative to the ground. GPS seismology is a very new field, but one that is gathering lots of excitement, particularly in respect to novel earthquake events. GPS seismology is a very new field, but one that is gathering lots of excitement, particularly in respect to novel earthquake early warning systems. The graph is synced with nearby CCTV footage of a marketplace. Watch how the crowd sways in time with the larger swings in GPS displacement. I'll play the video twice. So, let's watch it one more time from the beginning. Towards the end of the video, once the main seismic waves have passed, you'll notice that the GPS instrument and the marketplace continue to sway for some time after the main seismic waves have passed by. This effect is called basin resonance and it's similar to the way that jello wobbles for a few seconds after you poke it. Here it is right now. We'll explore basin resonance a lot more during the next lecture when we discuss earthquake intensity scales. We've now looked closely at how seismic waves manifest them at the Earth's surface. This slide is a quick reminder that seismology is also our main source of knowledge about the structure of Earth's deep interior. So-called global seismology exploits the fact that body waves are refracted and reflected by major boundaries within the Earth, such as the core mantle boundary. In the following discussion, epicentral distance is defined as the angle between the earthquake, the center of the Earth, and a distance seismometer. This schematic cross-section through Earth explains how we know the outer core to be liquid. P waves, shown in black, are refracted across the core mantle boundary because of the abrupt drop in the P wave velocity between the lower mantle and the outer core. This results in a P wave shadow zone between about 105 and 140 degrees epicentral distance from the earthquake. Within this distance range, seismographs will not display clear P wave arrivals. Seismograms at epicentral distances greater than 140 degrees do display P wave arrivals belonging to P waves that have passed through the core. However, secondary shear waves, shown in red, cannot pass through liquids, and so they are reflected, not refracted, at the core mantle boundary. This results in a much larger S wave shadow zone, which extends from 105 degrees epicentral distance on one side of the globe, all the way to 105 degrees on the other side. Stations between 105 and 140 degrees epicentral distance therefore neither display P waves nor S waves. The last part of the lecture will focus on how we locate earthquakes. Because P waves travel faster than S waves, their separation on a seismogram lengthens with increasing distance between earthquake and seismometer. Because P wave and S wave velocities in the earth are known to a good approximation, we can calculate this distance for any given seismometer. This is the first step in locating an earthquake. Let Tp be the time taken for the P wave to reach the seismometer, and Ts be the time taken for the S wave to reach the seismometer. Vp and Vs are the known P wave and S wave velocities respectively. X is the distance between the earthquake and the seismometer, which is what we initially seek to calculate. Tp and Ts are unknown, since we don't know the exact time at which the earthquake actually occurred. However, Ts minus Tp is known. It is the separation time between the P wave arrival and the S wave arrival on the seismogram. This separation time, Ts minus Tp, gets longer with increasing distance x. Now you do not need to remember the equations that I'm about to show. You just need to understand the principle that if you measure Ts minus Tp, and assuming reasonable values for velocities Vp and Vs, you can back out the distance x. Here's how we do it. Firstly, velocity is distance over time, therefore time is distance over velocity. This equation holds for Ts and Vs, and separately Tp and Vp. X in these equations is the same, the distance between the earthquake and the seismometer. Ts minus Tp is therefore x over Vs minus x over Vp. Now the slightly tricky bit. We're going to multiply both sides of the equation by Vp Vs, and then we're going to divide both sides of the equation by brackets Vp minus Vs. This gives us the following equation. Now everything on the left side of the equation is a known. Vp is known, reasonably well at least. Vs is also known reasonably well, and Ts minus Tp can be measured. It is the separation time between the P wave arrival and the S wave arrival on the seismogram. Let's take the cartoon seismogram upper right as an example. The separation time Ts minus Tp is one and a half minutes, or 90 seconds. We'll take Vp as 6.0 kilometers per second, and Vs as 3.75 kilometers a second. These are good representative values for the continental crust. We can now fill out the equation on the left. We end up with the distance between the earthquake and the seismometer at 900 kilometers. Note that this calculation is so somewhat oversimplified. At 900 kilometers distance, much of the P wave and S wave paths will be within the upper mantle, where seismic wave velocities are faster than the values given here. We have also assumed that the earthquake is at zero kilometers depth, whereas in reality most earthquakes nucleate at least a few kilometers depth. But these complications are easily overcome. The main thing here, as always, is the principle. We can now plot this seismometer, labeled A, on a schematic map. We know that the earthquake is 900 kilometers away, so it must lie somewhere on this circle, radius 900 kilometers. Now, we repeat the exercise for a neighboring seismometer, labeled B. Here, the separation time between the P wave and the S wave is three minutes, double that on seismogram A. This yields a distance of 1,800 kilometers. The earthquake must therefore also lie on this circle, radius 1,800 kilometers. With the third seismogram, we can repeat the exercise. The third circle, radius 3,300 kilometers, should intersect the first two at one of two points. Sure enough, it does. The earthquake can finally be located at the intersection of the three circles. We'll finish today's lecture by briefly introducing earthquake early warning systems. These state-of-the-art monitoring systems alert people to when damaging surface waves are expected to arrive at their location. They do so by detecting and locating earthquakes extremely quickly indeed, ideally within a few seconds of their initiation, and then warning people in nearby cities before the slower damaging surface waves reach them. For this to be even possible, it is crucial that the causative fault is surrounded by seismic stations. This is possible, albeit expensive, in continental regions, but it becomes very difficult indeed when you step offshore and the seismometers have to be placed at the bottom of an ocean. So far, very few regions on the planet have working earthquake early warning systems, though there is hope that BC will soon become one of them. We'll talk a lot more about earthquake early warning in Lecture 7, the final lecture of the earthquakes module. This concludes this lecture. Next time, we will complete our basic framework for understanding earthquake hazards by discussing the magnitude and intensity scales.