This lecture will introduce earthquake faulting and seismic waves. It's the first of four lectures and two discussion classes on earthquake hazards and will lay much of the foundations for the remainder of this module. This lecture is split into two parts. In this first part we will study the faults responsible for hosting earthquakes and explore the periodic build-up and release of stress on faults, a concept known as the earthquake cycle. This video footage was recorded from a drone following the magnitude 7.8 Kaikoura earthquake which struck New Zealand's South Island in November 2016. We can observe a pronounced linear trend of deformation called a surface rupture. Large continental earthquakes often produce these features. Importantly surface ruptures are not characterized by a chasm in the Earth's crust. This is a common misconception of Hollywood disaster movies. Instead we can observe that adjacent blocks of the Earth's crust on either side of the surface rupture have slipped past each other. This is clearly seen in the bend in this road. The road on the far side of the rupture is clearly offset from the road on the near side of the rupture. This offset was caused by slip along a fault. The surface rupture is merely where the fault intersects with Earth's surface. This second drone video shows more of the 2016 Kaikoura earthquake surface rupture. The offsets along this section of the rupture are more subtle than those in the first video. However if you watch carefully you can see fences and small stream channels that are cut by the fault. These are good places to look for offsets that indicate the sense of fault slip. The fence that the drone is now approaching is a good example. As we approach it look along the fence and you will see it step to the right across the fault. This indicates that the fault is right lateral. In other words the far side of the fault moved to the right relative to the near side of the fault. This is true whichever side of the fault one observes from. In other places such as here we also see a vertical offset across the surface rupture. This forms a landform called a fault scarp. The person flying the drone here is standing on one. In this section the zone of surface deformation appears to be a few tens of meters wide. This is probably because the fault has triggered a small landslide that adds to the ground deformation. This is another common feature of large earthquakes. The main point of this video is to show that earthquakes do not occur at points even though this is often how they are plotted on maps. Instead they involve slip along faults. In large events this faulting may be traced for tens to hundreds of kilometers. This map shows the surface ruptures of the Kaikoura earthquake in red. This earthquake was rather unusual in that it involved slip on about a dozen different faults. The epicenter marked by the black star merely represents where the slip started. The earthquake then unzipped one fault, jumped onto another and so on, eventually propagating 120 kilometers up the coastline over the course of about 80 seconds. The fault shown in the two videos is the Kekarengu fault near the northern end of the rupture zone. This photo is of a completely different fault at Arkitsa, a small town in central Greece. Whereas in the previous videos we were looking at earthquake surface ruptures, here we are looking at the actual fault plane. The area exposed here, which is about 100 meters wide and 50 meters tall, was excavated artificially by quarrying. If we look more closely at the fault we can see more evidence for repeated slip. The fault plane exhibits corrugations and striations at a variety of scales. These are analogous to the glacial striations we looked at in the last lecture as part of the evidence for continental drift. The fault striations are caused by the rock mass of one side of the fault scratching that of the other side and the striations align in the direction of slip. The fault plane is also smooth and polished by repeated earthquake slip. Large fault planes like the one exposed at Arkitsa and the one which generated the Kaikoura surface ruptures typically extends to depths of about 10 to 20 kilometers. This defines the seismogenic zone. In the continents rocks deeper than about 20 kilometers in the lower continental crust and below that the mantle are too warm to behave brittly and they deform in a ductile manner instead. In subduction zones the seismogenic zone can extend to depths significantly greater than 20 kilometers. Not all of the fault plane has to rupture in an earthquake. The rupture area is the part of the fault plane that slips in the earthquake. We'll see in the next lecture that large earthquakes involve large rupture areas and small earthquakes only involve small rupture areas. The surface rupture is where the rupture area intersects the Earth's surface. Not all large earthquakes generate surface ruptures. Small earthquakes rarely generate them. Their rupture area is usually too small to intersect with Earth's surface. The hypocenter is the point on the fault plane where slip initiates. It is normally at several several kilometers depth and only very rarely do earthquakes nucleate near the surface. The epicenter is the point at the surface directly above the hypocenter. When you see an earthquake or earthquakes represented as points on a map these are usually epicenters. Next we'll explore the three main types of fault defined by the sense of relative motion of the two sides of the fault. The first type is the reverse fault. Here one side is thrust over the other as the two blocks move together leading to shortening or contraction and crustal thickening. This motion occurs in response to horizontal compressive stress. The dip angle which is the angle between the fault plane and the surface can vary from a few degrees up to about 60 degrees as shown here. Those with very low dips of just a few degrees are classified as thrust faults. This is an example of a surface rupture produced by reverse faulting in the 1999 Chi Chi earthquake in Taiwan. This earthquake was the second deadliest in Taiwan's history killing 2,400 people and making 100,000 people homeless. Note that the overhang that was prominent in the previous cartoon figure is in reality very unstable and usually collapses into a small slope of debris as has happened here. In this photo from Nepal we see a river cut cliff that has exposed a thrust fault to a few meters depth. You can see that that the dip angle is about 30 degrees. This fault, the main Himalayan thrust, is part of a system of faults responsible for raising the Himalayan mountains. In subduction zones the main plate interface fault is known as a megathrust fault. This figure shows the Cascadian megathrust beneath Vancouver Island imaged just offshore Tofino. Seismic reflection profiling is a geophysical technique in which air guns are used to bounce energy off crustal reflectors and seismometers detect the echoes. The y-axis is analogous to depth but is actually two-way travel time. 10 seconds is equivalent to about 20 to 30 kilometers. Because of the low dip angle there is an enormous area of faulting lying within the seismogenic zone. This is why it is called a megathrust. As we shall see in the next lecture this large potential rupture area means that very very large earthquakes are possible. Because reverse and thrust faults form in response to horizontal compressive stresses they are associated with convergent plate boundaries, namely subduction zones and continental collision zones. The previous slide showed the Cascadia megathrust. Megathrust faults form the main plate interface in subduction zones highlighted in yellow in the schematic cross-section. The Chi-Chi earthquake in Taiwan accommodated thrust faulting within the four arc crust away from the main tectonic plate boundary megathrust. The main Himalayan thrust shown in the photo from Nepal is the fault shown in this schematic accommodating shortening at the leading edge of the India-Eurasia collision zone. The second main type of fault is called a normal fault. Here one side of the fault slides down the other as the two blocks move apart leading to horizontal extension and crustal thinning. This type of movement occurs in response to horizontal tension stress. The fault dip angle is usually steeper than for thrust faults, typically about 60 degrees. Note that the fault dips away from the up-thrown block. Unlike thrust earthquakes there is no unstable overhang. This means that the fault plane is often visible at the surface. This shows part of the surface rupture of the 1959 Hebgen Lake earthquake in Montana. This event occurred in the Basin and Range Province, a vast continental rift that stretches from the Arizona-Mexico border to the Montana-Canada border. The geologist shown here is looking directly at the fault plane. This surface rupture was produced in the 2016 Norcia earthquake in central Italy. The freshly exposed rupture plane is white. You can see that there has been about two meters of slip at this location. The larger grey rock face sitting above the fresh surface rupture has been exposed in successive previous earthquakes, but is now weathered and eroded. Because normal faults form in response to horizontal tension stresses, they are mainly associated with divergent plate boundaries, mid-ocean ridges and continental rifts. However, under certain circumstances, normal faults can also form within convergent plate boundaries. In subduction zones, bending of the down-going oceanic plate causes extension in the upper part of the slab, highlighted here in yellow. This results in normal faulting earthquakes, both offshore, in a region known as the outer rise of the subduction zone, and also beneath the arc at intermediate depths. Earthquakes at intermediate depths, also called intra-slab earthquakes, because they occur within the subducting slab, are a major source of seismic hazard here in Cascadia. Normal faulting earthquakes can also occur within continental collision zones when the crust is over-thickened, becomes gravitationally unstable and starts to collapse. Tibet is the best example, but the 2016 Norcia earthquakes in central Italy occurred for similar reasons. The third main type of fault is the strike- slip fault. Here, the two sides move laterally past one another. Since the motions are horizontal, there is no crustal thickening or thinning. Strike- slip faults slip in response to simple shear stress. Strike-slip faults are usually close to vertical, meaning that the dip is about 90 degrees. The strike- slip fault is left-lateral if motion of the opposite side is to the left. The fault is right-lateral if motion of the opposite side is to the right. This shows part of the surface rupture of the magnitude 7.1 Ridgecrest earthquake in California in July 2019. You can see that the far side of the fault, where the truck is, moved to the right relative to the near side of the fault, where the photographer stands. This makes the fault a right-lateral strike-slip fault. Here's another clear right-lateral offset to a broken pipe. This earthquake is the same event that generated the shaking we saw in this video from Lecture 1. Here, we toggle between before and after satellite photographs of another part of the Ridgecrest earthquake rupture. The offset feature in the center of the photograph is a road, and the offset feature on the right is an aqueduct. There was a concern that an earthquake in California could disrupt the LA Aqueduct, which feeds Los Angeles with meltwater from the Sierra Nevada. The LA Aqueduct crosses numerous strike-slip faults, including the San Andreas fault. Fortunately, this aqueduct was not damaged in the Ridgecrest earthquake. Because of the potential for damage to critical infrastructure, it is important to map earthquake surface ruptures quickly. Traditionally, this was done with boots on the ground by field and engineering geologists. While this still happens, in modern earthquakes, mapping can often be completed more quickly using satellite images like these. Computer algorithms can even correlate the before and after photographs to produce color maps like this one. Warm colors show surface displacements towards the north, and cool colors show surface displacements towards the south. The Ridgecrest surface rupture can easily be traced as the sharp discontinuity between the northward and southward displacements. The title slide of this lecture shows another right lateral strike-slip surface rupture produced by the magnitude 7.0 Kumamoto earthquake in Japan in April 2016. Right lateral offsets are clearly expressed in the cropped rows. Here's another part of the Kumamoto rupture in which the fault cuts right across some greenhouses that also display right lateral offsets. Strike-slip plate boundaries include oceanic transform faults and continental shear zones. The 2019 Ridgecrest earthquake occurred in the eastern California shear zone, a continental shear zone that splays off the main plate boundary fault, the San Andreas, in the Mojave Desert and then crosses into Nevada. However, strike-slip earthquakes are also common in other tectonic settings. The 2016 Kumamoto earthquake occurred in the Japan fore arc. Subduction in this region occurs at an oblique angle to the plate boundary, resulting in thrust and strike-slip components of relative plate motion. The thrust component is accommodated by the main subduction megathrust fault, but the strike-slip component is accommodated within the fore arc along a fault known as the median tectonic line. This is where the Kumamoto earthquake struck. Continental collision zones also host large strike-slip earthquakes where blocks of crust move sideways to escape the collision. This schematic map shows eastward motions of the China block in yellow and the Sunderland block in orange out of the way of the main India Eurasia collision. These eastward motions are accommodated by large strike-slip faults denoted with green shear symbols. We've been introduced to the three main types of fault as defined by their relative sense of movement. Reverse or thrust faults, normal faults and strike-slip faults. However, these are really end member fault types. Many earthquakes involve a mix of lateral and vertical motions. These are called oblique slip faults. This photo shows the Papatia fault, another of the faults that ruptured as part of the 2016 Kaikoura earthquake in New Zealand. Look carefully and you can see that the road and railway are offset vertically and left laterally across the fault. These offsets are even more apparent from this ground photograph taken from the top of the fault scarp. Using the person for scale, the vertical height of the scarp is probably about five meters. On the down thrown side of the fault, the rails have been dragged off the gravel ballast but their original position can still be seen, helping to find the left lateral component of slip. This also appears to be a few meters. Consider an experiment in which a block is dragged across a tabletop pulled by a spring. The force applied to the end of the spring is analogous to plate tectonic forces. The spring itself represents the elasticity of the Earth's crust and the interface between the block and the table symbolizes a fault plane. When one starts to pull at the spring, shear stresses start to build up along the interface but the block initially does not move. Instead, frictional resistance keeps the block stuck to the table. If we keep pulling, there will eventually be sufficient tension in the spring that this frictional resistance is overcome and the block will suddenly jerk forward, releasing the tension in the spring. This is analogous to the slip in an earthquake. We call this stick-slip behavior. Faults are stuck between earthquakes because of their frictional resistance to plate tectonic stresses. Eventually, friction is overcome and the two sides of the fault slip past one another, causing an earthquake. If we continue pulling at the spring for longer, we will repeat the pattern. The spring will lengthen, shear stresses along the interface will grow, but the block will stick in place. Eventually, shear stresses will overcome the frictional resistance and the block will jerk forward again. This simple experiment is a helpful introduction to the concept of the earthquake cycle. This describes how stresses build up on a fault over long periods of time, driven by plate tectonics, to be released periodically in a sudden earthquake. In the cartoon shown here, the duration of the stick phase and the distance over which the block slips is the same in the first cycle as in the second cycle. This is analogous to the return period between successive earthquakes being always the same and the magnitude of those earthquakes being always the same too. Unfortunately, if you try this experiment at home with a real block on a real tabletop, results will look a little messier. Sometimes the block will stick for a short time and sometimes it will stick for a long time. Sometimes the block will slip a short distance and sometimes it will slip a longer distance. This inherent unpredictability reflects that there are microscopic variations of frictional resistance across the interface. If you can't make regular repeating block movements in this simple experimental setup, what chance have you got to make regular repeating earthquakes in the real world? This is one of the main reasons that earthquakes cannot be predicted. I encourage you to watch the video linked to in the accompanying questions to consider, which demonstrates this point very elegantly using a real block, spring and table apparatus. The experiment in the video provides some other related observations that are also pertinent to earthquake behaviour. Now we'll take the tabletop experiment and apply it to faults in the Earth's crust. We're going to look at patterns of crustal strain between earthquakes and during earthquakes using this cartoon top-down map view of a fault to illustrate. These patterns will be manifest in the deformation of a schematic fence line shown here in red. The inter-seismic phase of the earthquake cycle is analogous to the stick part of the tabletop experiment. Inter means between, so inter-seismic means between earthquakes. On most faults, inter-seismic periods last tens, hundreds or even thousands of years. During the inter-seismic period, steady motion occurs away from the fault, causing the fence to warp. Maths and science students in the class will recognise the pattern of warping as similar to an arc tangent function. However, the fault itself is stuck or locked and so the fence line does not break where it crosses the fault. Nowadays, inter-seismic deformation can be tracked using networks of GPS receivers fixed to monuments on the ground. Each little red vector on this map of California represents the motion of a fixed GPS receiver with respect to the stable North American plate, recorded and averaged over several years. GPS instruments along the California coastline move northwards rapidly at about 30 to 40 millimetres per year. Those in eastern California move north more slowly and those in eastern Nevada move hardly at all. The main fault here is the San Andreas fault, which has not hosted a major earthquake in over a hundred years. The GPS data, which go back only as far as the 1990s, therefore cover part of the inter-seismic period of the earthquake cycle on the San Andreas fault. This graph shows a cross-section through the GPS velocities taken perpendicular to the central San Andreas fault. Each black square with error bars represents the fault parallel velocity of a single GPS instrument. The arc tangent function shown in the cartoon map is beautifully reproduced by these real data. If we look carefully at the velocities at the ends of the arc tangent profile, plus 20 millimetres a year at the bottom of the graph and minus 15 millimetres per year at the top of the graph, we can estimate the rate at which plate tectonic strains build up along the San Andreas fault. The answer in this case is about 35 millimetres a year. In other words, each year there are an additional 35 millimetres of potential slip built up on the fault. Historical accounts by early European settlers indicate that the last earthquake on this central section of the San Andreas fault was in 1857 CE, about 160 years ago. We can therefore estimate that during the latest inter-seismic period, since 1857, the fault has been loaded with about five and a half metres of potential slip, that is 35 millimetres per year times 160 years. In the next lecture we'll see that slip correlates closely with magnitude. Five and a half metres of slip is equivalent to a very large earthquake, probably approaching a magnitude 8. Maps like this one are a crucial component of seismic hazard analysis, because the plate boundary strains, represented by variations in the GPS velocity arrow lengths, essentially set the overall tempo of earthquake activity. Regions with strong gradients in GPS velocities can expect more and or larger earthquakes. Regions with weak variations in GPS velocities can expect fewer and or smaller earthquakes. Returning to the cartoon, let us suppose that we are approaching the end of the inter-seismic period and we build a new straight fence line across the fault. We will now see what happens during the co-seismic phase of the earthquake cycle. Co- means during, so the co-seismic phase represents what happens during an earthquake. If the inter-seismic period lasts tens, hundreds or thousands of years, the co-seismic phase is over in a matter of seconds. The older fence on the left is now straight again, except for a clear offset at the fault. The newer fence is also offset at the fault, but is warped away from it in a pattern that reverses the arc tangent shape of the inter-seismic strain. And just to illustrate that fence offsets are not only theoretical, here is an actual fence offset caused by the 2010 Darfield earthquake in New Zealand. As you can see this was a right lateral strike-slip earthquake, just like our cartoon example. A critical point is that the pattern of slow inter-seismic strain accumulation and rapid co-seismic release is cyclical. We know this because many active faults exhibit geological offsets far larger than the meter scale slip involved in a typical large earthquake. Geological offsets of tens, hundreds or thousands of meters must represent the cumulative impacts of many, many earthquakes. A consequence of this observation is that large earthquakes do not create new faults, they reactivate existing faults. This video shows a fly-through of a high-resolution topographic model of part of the central San Andreas fault. The model was created using a laser scanner deployed from an aircraft, a technology known as LiDAR. It is a few kilometers in length with a pixel size on the ground of about one meter. The San Andreas fault can be traced across the middle of the data set, looking much like a knife cut. Perpendicular to the fault we see numerous channels carved by small streams that flow across the fault. The streams have pronounced kinks at the fault, stepping to the right since the San Andreas fault is right lateral. What's interesting is that the stream offsets have a wide variety of sizes, from a few meters up to a few hundred meters. The smallest offsets were likely caused in the most recent earthquake in 1857 CE. The larger offsets of tens to hundreds of meters represent the cumulative impact of many earthquakes over many earthquake cycles, taking thousands and thousands of years. We'll finish this part of the lecture by considering the earthquake cycle at subduction zones, which looks a little different to the cartoon strike-slip fault shown previously. At subduction zones the earthquake cycle involves vertical as well as horizontal motions. The initial condition, shown here, shows an oceanic plate on the left subducting underneath an overriding plate on the right. The megathrust fault marks the shallow part of the contact surface between the two plates. During the inter-seismic phase the oceanic plate slowly converges with the overriding plate, but the megathrust fault, shown in grey, is stuck or locked. Ongoing convergence causes the overriding plate to become squeezed. At the trench the overriding plate is pushed backwards like the loading of a spring. Further back the squeezing causes the overriding plate to bulge upwards or uplift. During the earthquake, the co-seismic phase, these long-term motions are reversed in a matter of seconds. Friction on the locked megathrust fault is overcome and the overriding plate slips over the subducting plate rebounding to its original position. The bulge in the overriding plate is relaxed causing subsidence at the coastline. Further out to sea the seafloor is uplifted, raising the water column and generating a tsunami. We will learn a lot more about this type of tsunami generation in module E. This concludes the first part of the lecture.