In this lecture, we will examine plate tectonics, the concept that Earth's outer lithosphere is divided into rigid plates that move relative to one another, driven by convection of the mantle. These relative plate motions help shape the Earth's surface, generating the peaks and troughs in this historic map of the ocean seafloor, and in doing so, cause earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and ultimately, landslides and tsunamis. An appreciation for tectonics is therefore crucial for understanding the full complement of geological hazards that we will spend most of the remainder of this course studying. In this first video, we will start by looking at the historical development of the theories of continental drift in the early 20th century and plate tectonics in the 1960s. We will then look at two of the key processes involved in plate tectonics, seafloor spreading at mid-ocean ridges and subduction beneath volcanic arcs. Earth's largest landmasses fit together like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. This pattern was noted as early as the late 16th century by Abraham Ortelius, a Dutch cartographer. It's particularly apparent across the southern Atlantic Ocean, where eastern Brazil fits snugly into the Gulf of Guinea in equatorial West Africa. But other continental coastlines also appear to match, including the eastern seaboard of North America with the western seaboards of North Africa and Europe, as well as Antarctica with southeastern Africa, eastern India and southern Australia. In 1912, a German meteorologist, Alfred Wegener, proposed that this was more than a coincidence. He suggested that the continents once formed a single giant landmass called Pangaea, from the Greek pan meaning all or whole, and gaia meaning land. Pangaea lay next to a single vast ocean called Panthalassa, or all sea. At some point in deep geological time, the supercontinent broke up and the continents then slowly drifted into their present positions. This was the theory of continental drift. The fit of the coastlines was not the only evidence for continental drift. There were also geological clues that supported Wegener's theory. Firstly, Wegener noted similarities in the geology on opposing sides of the Atlantic Ocean. For example, the Appalachian Mountains in eastern North America, the Caledonian Mountains of western Britain, Norway and eastern Greenland and the Atlas Mountains of Morocco are all of the same age and share many other geological characteristics. Secondly, Wegener noticed that certain fossil plants and animals could be found on matching margins of the continents. For example, the Permian freshwater reptile Misosaurus and the Triassic land reptile Cynognathus are found only in Africa and South America, while Lystrosaurus, another land reptile, is found in Africa, Madagascar, India and Antarctica. These reptiles could hardly have swum across wide oceans, and so Wegener concluded that their territories must have once been adjoined. There was also glacial evidence for continental drift. When a glacier advances, it carries with it large volumes of rocky debris, including material that has fallen onto the glacier from surrounding mountainsides, as well as rocks plucked from the underlying bedrock at the base of the glacier. As the glacier flows downhill, rocky debris at the base of the glacier cuts scratches or gouges into the underlying bedrock, known as glacial striations. Roche moutonnées are landforms created when the glacier rides up over a hard rock and chips off rock on the downstream slope, leaving a jagged downstream edge. After the glacier eventually recedes and disappears, these landforms are useful indicators of the direction of former ice flow. Striations and Roche moutonnées are very common in regions that were glaciated during the Pleistocene period, the so-called last ice age, including here in Victoria. Visit any of the rocky platforms around Victoria's coastline and you will observe these features. The photos here show Finlayson Point off Dallas Road. Most of the striations align north-south, and the jagged downstream edges of the Roche moutonnées point southwards, towards the Strait of Juan de Fuca. These orientations show that glaciers sourced from the Cordilleran ice sheet flowed from central Vancouver Island and the lower mainland, southwards towards the Strait of Juan de Fuca, and from there westwards to the Pacific Ocean. However, glacial striations can also be observed on older bedrock surfaces in low or mid-latitude regions that were never glaciated during the Pleistocene. Examples include southern Australia, India, southeastern Africa, and eastern Argentina. What's even stranger is that in some of these places, particularly Australia and Argentina, the striations appear to show ice flowing onto the land from the ocean, the opposite direction to what one would expect. These direction indicators make much better sense when the southern continents are restored into their positions within the supercontinent Pangaea. This reconstruction shows that the glaciers flowed outwards from a large ice sheet centred on Antarctica and southeastern Africa. The supercontinent Pangaea existed from about 330 million years ago, during the Carboniferous period, through the Permian and Triassic, until about 180 million years ago, during the Jurassic period. At this point, Pangaea gradually split into two smaller supercontinents, a northern one called Laurasia, and a southern one called Gondwanaland. Laurasia combines Laurentia, the name given to the core of the North American continent, and Eurasia, the continent comprising Europe and Asia. Laurentia in turn is named after the St Lawrence River in Ontario and Quebec. The Gondwanaland supercontinent, meanwhile, comprised the continents of South America, Africa, Antarctica, and Australia, as well as India. It is named after Gondwana, a region in central India. The two supercontinents were separated by the Tethys Ocean. Tethys was a Greek sea goddess. This shows the configuration as 135 million years ago, during the early Cretaceous period. The northern supercontinent, Laurasia, has started to rift into two smaller continents, Laurentia, the precursor to modern North America, and Eurasia. This rifting propagated from south to north, opening the North Atlantic Ocean. At the same time, the southern supercontinent, Gondwanaland, separated into three landmasses, with the opening of the Indian and Southern Oceans. There is a western landmass comprising Africa and South America, an eastern landmass comprising Antarctica and Australia, and India, which has already started to move rapidly northwards across the Tethys Ocean. By 65 million years ago, at the end of the Cretaceous period, the South Atlantic Ocean had opened, splitting South America from Africa, while the North Atlantic continued to grow. Growth of the North Atlantic Ocean pushed Laurentia westwards, where it collided with a series of microplates situated in the Pacific Ocean. These are too small to appear in this illustration. These collisions built out the western margin of Laurentia, culminating in the addition of Vancouver Island, which belonged to a microplate called Rangelia. With this final addition, the continent of North America took on its modern shape and size. Further east, the Adria microplate, comprising Italy and the Adriatic Sea, separated from northern Africa and drifted northwards into western Eurasia, raising the Alps. India, meanwhile, continued its northern drift across the Tethys Ocean, where it rapidly approached southern Eurasia. Finally, during the Cenozoic era, from the end of the Cretaceous to the present day, Arabia separated from Africa, forming the Red Sea, and drifted northwards where it collided with Eurasia, forming the mountain belts of the Middle East. India collided with Eurasia, forming the world's three highest mountain ranges, the Himalayas, Pamirs and Tian Shan. The once vast Tethys Ocean now exists only in small fragments in parts of the Mediterranean Sea, the Black Sea and the southern Caspian Sea. Finally, Australia rifted northwards off Antarctica to form the modern Southern Ocean. Computer models can make projections for how continental drift will continue into the future. The timescale in this model is given in millions of years. We can expect that the Atlantic Ocean will continue to open and that Australia will continue to move northwards, eventually colliding with Southeast Asia. As we play further into the future, however, these models become more and more speculative. For example, this model has Antarctica dividing in two, eastern Siberia rifting off Asia, and eventually closure of the Atlantic, Indian and Southern Oceans to form a new supercontinent, starting about 250 million years in the future. It's worth noting, though, that much of this particular model is probably guesswork. Despite the abundance of geological evidence for continental drift, Alfred Wegener's ideas were widely dismissed at the time, and for the best part of a half century. This is because there was not yet any plausible physical explanation for how the land masses moved across the oceans. Geophysicists, that is, scientists studying the physical properties of the Earth using methods such as seismology, were especially dismissive. However, by the 1960s, it was geophysicists of the time who ended up solving this puzzle by coming up with a mechanism for the drift of the continents. This mechanism is called plate tectonics. Plate tectonics describes how the Earth's outer lithosphere is divided into a discrete number of rigid tectonic plates that move relative to one another. The motions of the plates are driven by convection of the underlying mantle asthenosphere and mesosphere. If you recall from earlier in the course, mantle convection is itself driven by the transfer of primordial heat from Earth's superhot metallic core to its cool outer surface. Mantle convection is ordered into discrete cells. The upwelling currents feed the creation of new lithosphere at mid-ocean ridges as depicted on the right-hand side of the figure, while the down-going currents are associated with the destruction of old lithosphere and its reintegration into the deep mantle at subduction zones shown on the left-hand side of the figure. In between, the plates are carried along the upper limb of the convection cell like a conveyor belt. This is the mechanism for continental drift. A key tenet of plate tectonics is that the plates are internally rigid but move relative to one another along plate boundaries. In physical terms, stress applied at one margin is transferred to the opposite margin with no internal deformation, and all of the relative motion accompanied by earthquakes and volcanoes occurs at the boundaries. This map shows Earth's major tectonic plates in pastel shades and plate boundaries in red. There are three basic types of plate boundary, each characterized by the direction of relative motion between the plates on either side. Firstly, divergent plate boundaries, shown here in green, are where two tectonic plates move away from each other or diverge. This divergence is accommodated by the creation of new lithosphere fed by the rising limb of a mantle convection cell. If the two plates are oceanic, the divergent boundary is known as a mid-ocean ridge. Examples include the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and the Juan de Fuca Ridge west of Vancouver Island. If the two plates are continental, the divergent boundary is known as a continental rift. The best-known continental rift is the East African Rift. Secondly, convergent boundaries, shown here in blue, are where the two plates move towards each other or converge. One of two things happens. Either the denser plate plunges underneath the more buoyant plate back down into the deep mantle, where it is reintegrated, thus completing the mantle convection cell. This process, subduction, occurs beneath Vancouver Island in the Cascadia subduction zone, one of several subduction zones around the so-called Pacific Rim. Alternatively, if both plates are made of buoyant continental lithosphere, they collide into each other, thickening the lithosphere and forming a mountain range with a deep crustal route. This is known as a continental collision zone. The best-known example of this is the India-Eurasia collision zone, which has formed the Himalayan Mountains and the Tibetan Plateau. The third major type of plate boundary is a strike-slip boundary. Here, lithosphere is neither created, like in divergent boundaries, nor consumed or thickened, like in convergent boundaries. Instead, the two plates move sideways past one another along a strike-slip or transform fault. Much of the Pacific North America plate boundary behaves in this way. Including the San Andreas fault in California and the Queen Charlotte fault north of Haida Gwaii. Before delving into plate boundaries in a little more detail, we'll briefly discuss how plate tectonics was discovered. The discovery came about over the course of a few years in the mid-1960s, about a half century after Wegener proposed his theory of continental drift. The timing is no coincidence because it was a variety of geophysical datasets collected during the Second World War and at the start of the subsequent Cold War that were key to revealing the processes of plate tectonics. The first of these important new datasets depicted in this image was the topography of the seafloor, given its own term of the bathymetry. Shown here is the bathymetry of the Pacific as drafted by the famous cartographer Marie Tharp. Ocean bathymetry was remarkably poorly known prior to the Second World War when the first detailed mapping was carried out by Harry Hess, an American geophysicist drafted by the US Navy in World War II. As captain of USS Cape Johnson, he conducted sonar mapping during transit from battle to battle across the Pacific Ocean. Sonar, developed as a technology in response to the sinking of the Titanic, works by transmitting sound waves into the ocean from a ship and detecting echoes from objects in the water or from the seafloor. The longer the delay to the echo, the deeper the water. After the war ended, Harry Hess plotted all of these sonar data up for the Pacific Ocean. Marie Tharp did the same in the Atlantic. Their work revealed a rich variety of seafloor landforms that took scientists by complete surprise. Firstly, the continents are surrounded by shallow continental shelves, gently sloping regions with water depths of up to a few hundred meters. The outer shelf is marked by a steep continental slope. This slope flattens out at about five kilometers water depth into vast, relatively featureless regions known as abyssal plains. These abyssal plains account for the majority of the area of all ocean basins. The relative monotony of the abyssal plains is broken occasionally by isolated underwater volcanic peaks called seamounts. These rise upwards from the abyssal plains to reach close to sea level. If the growth of the volcano breaches sea level, a volcanic island will form. The western Pacific is especially littered with volcanic seamounts and islands. More interestingly still, some oceans are characterized by long, sinuous, untoward mountain ranges, the mid-ocean ridges, which reach upwards from the abyssal plain at five kilometers water depth to shallower depths of just two to three kilometers. The one labeled here is the East Pacific Rise. These mid-ocean ridges are cut into segments by sharp gouge marks called fracture zones oriented at right angles to the ridges. Elsewhere, long, narrow topographic depressions called trenches reach water depths of 11 kilometers. The discovery of mid-ocean ridges led quite quickly to the discovery of seafloor spreading, the process by which new oceanic crust is formed. Rising asthenosphere mantle partially melts to produce liquid magma, which erupts as lava at the mid-ocean ridge axis. Quenched by the cold seawater, the lava freezes and crystallizes into new volcanic rock, basalt. This newly formed oceanic crust pushes the older oceanic crust on either side to one side. As it is pushed further and further from the ridge axis, the crust cools, densifies, and because of isostasy, which we'll cover later in the lecture, it sinks or subsides. This is why abyssal plains sit at about five kilometers water depth compared to just two to three kilometers at the ridge axis. The melting and volcanism that causes seafloor spreading is related to the relative positions of the geothermal gradient, the change in temperature with increasing depth, and the peridotite solidus, the temperature and pressure conditions at which mantle peridotite starts to partially melt. Beneath normal oceanic lithosphere, shown here, the geothermal gradient in red doesn't quite touch the solidus in green. Therefore, there is little melting of the mantle peridotite. Beneath mid-ocean ridges, seafloor spreading allows the convecting asthenosphere mantle to rise to much shallower depths and lower pressures than in normal conditions. As shown on the right here, the steep part of the geotherm, signifying convection, now reaches much shallower depths, such that it crosses over the solidus, leading to partial melting of the mantle solidus, leading to partial melting of the mantle peridotite. Recall that any material's melt state depends on both temperature and pressure. When melting occurs due to a reduction in pressure rather than due to an increase in temperature, we call it decompression melting. Decompression melting is the reason behind volcanism along mid-ocean ridges. Another geophysical dataset emerged from the Second World War to lend further support to the idea of seafloor spreading. Magnetometers are devices that measure the direction and strength of a magnetic field at a particular location. Towed by ships across mid-ocean ridges during the Second World War, magnetometers revealed symmetric patterns of magnetic anomalies called seafloor striping. In this cartoon, peaks in the magnetometer trace occur above seafloor colored in shades of brown, representing oceanic crust of normal magnetic polarity. Troughs in the magnetometer record occur above seafloor colored in beige, representing oceanic crust with reversed magnetic polarity. The seafloor stripes of brown and beige are symmetric about the mid-ocean ridge axis, which is denoted by the dashed black line. We will explore exactly how these magnetic anomalies form in the next few slides, but for the time being, you can think of the magnetic stripes as a kind of tape recorder of past seafloor spreading on either side of the mid-ocean ridge. This map shows real magnetic striping recorded in the eastern Pacific Ocean, offshore British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon. The dark red stripe is the very youngest oceanic crust, less than about 1 million years in age, of normal magnetic polarity, formed at the active Juan de Fuca mid-ocean ridge. Successively cooler colors, oranges, greens, and blues, show normal polarity crust formed at the Juan de Fuca ridge millions of years in the past. Separating these colored stripes are white stripes, representing reverse polarity crust. How do these magnetic anomalies form? This rare underwater footage shows basaltic magma being erupted at a mid-ocean ridge. As the magma erupts as lava, it is quickly quenched by the cold seawater and crystallizes into rock. You can see it form a kind of tube shape, which geologists call a pillow. There are some nice examples of pillow basalts exposed along the coastline near Victoria, such as at Tower Point in Machosin. These were formed at an ancient mid-ocean ridge, but have since been thrust up onto the continental crust of Vancouver Island. The basaltic rock is rich in the mineral magnetite, formula Fe3O4, named because of its strong magnetic properties. Magnetite crystals act like tiny bar magnets when they form, aligning with the Earth's current magnetic field. This process, called thermal remnant magnetization, is called Earth's magnetic field is caused by liquid iron in the outer core flowing in rotational patterns due to convection and the Earth's rotation. The geomagnetic field resembles a bar magnet, but it is not a magnetic field. The geomagnetic field is a kind of magnetic field that is caused by liquid iron in the outer core flowing in rotational patterns due to convection and the Earth's rotation. The geomagnetic field resembles a bar magnet, with the red arrows indicating the direction of magnetic field lines. A compass points along these lines. The magnetic poles are where the field lines are vertical. Note that they do not coincide exactly with the geographic poles, which represent Earth's spin axis. Earth's geomagnetic field is constantly changing in ways that are unstable and unpredictable. This map shows the wonder of the North Magnetic Pole over the past 120 years. Although the direction of polar wonder appears quite consistent, the velocity is not. The pole has moved as far in the past 20 years as it did in the preceding 100. This reflects the instability of flow patterns in the outer core. Paleomagnetism is the study of how Earth's magnetic field has varied not just over recent human history, but through deep geological time. It informs us that occasionally an even more abrupt change in the geomagnetic field occurs, in which the magnetic north and south poles swap places. These events are known as geomagnetic reversals. Coupled with the continuous process of seafloor spreading, these geomagnetic reversals are what generate the symmetric pattern of normal and reverse magnetic polarities recorded in the magnetic striping of the oceanic crust. Radiometric dating, introduced earlier in the course, allows us to determine the ages at which volcanic rocks formed using the concentration of certain radioactive isotopes and their known half-lives. Radiometric dating of basaltic oceanic rocks around the world has assigned ages to Earth's past geomagnetic reversals, shown here. Ages are given in million years on the left and in named geological periods and epochs in the centre. The barcode on the right shows the geomagnetic polarity with normal polarity in black and reverse polarity in white. This shows that geomagnetic reversals have occurred at apparently random intervals from as short as a few thousand years to as long as several million years. The last reversal occurred about 780,000 years ago. The distinctive barcode pattern allows us to date oceanic crust everywhere that magnetic anomalies have been mapped, without needing to radiometrically date rocks sampled from the seafloor, which would be incredibly expensive. The result of this dating is maps like this. This shows the age of the oceanic crust globally. The youngest crust at active mid-ocean ridges is shown in red, with progressively cooler colours indicating older and older crust. The wide red bands are therefore fast-spreading centres, and narrower bands are slow-spreading mid-ocean ridges. The fastest mid-ocean ridge is the east-pacific rise, which generates 15 centimetres of new crust every year. The oldest oceanic crust is along this eastern seaboard of America, and is only about 200 million years old, relatively young considering the age of the Earth. It's possible that even older oceanic crust is present in the eastern Mediterranean, perhaps 240 million years old, but the seafloor here is covered in thick evaporitic deposits, layers of sea salt, that are difficult or impossible to drill through, and so its age cannot be easily determined. Either way, the oldest oceanic crust pales into comparison with the oldest continental crust, which is 3,500 million years old, or 3.5 billion years old. Geologically speaking, all oceanic crust is young. The reason for this is that oceanic crust, and especially old cold and dense oceanic crust, is much more prone to subduct into the mantle and disappear than buoyant continental crust. This brings us to the next critical process in plate tectonics, subduction. Subduction is the process by which old cold dense oceanic lithosphere is consumed beneath more buoyant lithosphere at a convergent plate boundary. This schematic shows a slice or cross section through a subduction zone in which two plates are converging. The subducting plate, often called a slab, is flexed downwards beneath the overriding plate. This flexure is what causes deep sea trenches, the lowest points on Earth's surface. As the subducting plate moves deeper, metamorphic reactions release water from hydrated minerals in the oceanic crust into the overriding plate, where it causes melting. The magma that is produced rises through the overriding crust to feed a chain of volcanoes called a volcanic arc. The overriding plate can be a continental lithosphere, in which case the arc is called a continental arc. The Cascade Mountains in Washington, Oregon, and Northern California are a great example of a continental arc, since the overriding plate, North America, is continental. Alternatively, the overriding plate can be oceanic lithosphere. The volcanic chain is then called an island arc. The Aleutian Islands in Alaska are an example of an island arc. In island arc settings, the subducting oceanic plate is the older, colder, and therefore denser of the two oceanic plates, and the overriding plate is the younger, warmer, and more buoyant of the two. The region in between the volcanic arc and the trench is known as the fore arc. Subduction zone fore arcs are typically 200 to 300 kilometers wide. Victoria is situated within the fore arc of the Cascadia subduction zone, since we lie between the trench, offshore Vancouver Island, and the continental arc on the mainland of Washington. Our closest volcano is Kulshan, or Mount Baker, which can be seen from Victoria. Fore arcs are regions of significant geological danger, with the potential for volcanic eruptions, large earthquakes, and secondary hazards like landslides and tsunamis. We'll now introduce the third geophysical dataset that was critical in the discovery of plate tectonics in the 1960s, along with the bathymetric and magnetic data discussed previously. I'm referring to seismological data collected by the Worldwide Standardized Seismograph Network, installed in the 1960s, as the first ever global network of seismometers. We'll see in later lectures that several seismometers are needed to locate an earthquake accurately. Before the WWSSN, many individual institutes or universities deployed their own solitary seismometers, but the analogue paper recordings lacked common standards, or even the same precise timing. Stations belonging to the WWSSN, on the other hand, had common standards and were monitored by a dedicated agency, the International Seismological Centre, based in the UK, just outside London. Their analysis routinely detected and located earthquakes around the globe for the very first time. You can see that the WWSSN incorporated seismometers in all continents, including Antarctica, but lacked any stations in the USSR or China. This is because the WWSSN was set up to monitor the testing of nuclear weapons, which generate seismic waves just like natural earthquakes do. Detecting and locating earthquakes was ostensibly only a by-product of this programme. The WWSSN was later superseded by the Global Digital Seismographic Network, or GDSN, but this is still largely funded by defence agencies that seek to monitor nuclear testing in places like North Korea and Iran. We will use seismic readings from stations belonging to the GDSN in one of our activity classes. The routine earthquake detection and location of the International Seismological Centre produced maps like this one. It shows earthquake epicenters delineating the major plate boundaries, including the mid-ocean ridges and subduction zones labelled on the map. Earthquakes on this map are coloured by their depth. The shallowest earthquakes shown in blue are those with depths of less than 70 kilometres, though most of these occur in the uppermost 20 kilometres. You can see that all earthquakes occurring along mid-ocean ridges, such as the East Pacific Rise and the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, are shallow. Intermediate-depth earthquakes are defined as those with depths between 70 and 300 kilometres and are shown in yellow. Deep earthquakes with depths from 300 to as deep as 700 kilometres are plotted in red. Intermediate and deep earthquakes only occur at subduction zones, and the latter in fact only occur at some subduction zones. Look carefully and you can see that in these subduction zones, the shallow, intermediate and deep earthquakes form parallel bands. These outline the descending lithospheric slabs of the subduction zones, as shown in this schematic cross-section across the Tonga subduction zone in the Western Pacific. These regions of deep seismicity are named Wadati-Benioff zones after the two seismologists, one Japanese and one American, who independently discovered deep earthquakes in the 1940s. How can you get earthquakes at depths where the mantle is warm and ductile? This is an interesting question in an area of active research. One idea is that the descending oceanic lithosphere can, in the very fastest subducting slabs, remain cold enough to remain brittle at these depths. Another idea is that these earthquakes reflect abrupt mineral transformations from one crystal structure to another, forced by the extreme pressure. Either way, certain properties of earthquakes at these depths differ from those of regular shallow earthquakes, including a notable paucity of aftershock activity. Volcanic arcs above subduction zones contain explosive stratovolcanoes, like Mount St. Helens in Cascadia, seen here erupting in 1980. This contrast with the Pillow Basalts erupted relatively peacefully along mid-ocean ridges at great water depths, as we saw in an earlier video. Volcanism at subduction zones differs in cause from that occurring at mid-ocean ridges. If you recall, at mid-ocean ridges, partial melting of peridotite occurs due to a change to the normal geothermal gradient, causing decompression melting. In contrast, melting beneath volcanic arcs occurs because of the addition of water to the mantle, released by wet sediments and hydrated volcanic rocks in the subduction oceanic crust. As depicted on the right, water lowers the surface of the mantle, as depicted on the right, water lowers the solidus, the green line, allowing it to cross the geotherm, the red line. Partial melting of peridotite therefore occurs at a lower temperature than normal. We will look closely at the consequences of these differences for volcanic eruptions later on in the course. This concludes the first part of the lecture.