In the second lecture video, we'll look at other types of plate boundary, namely continental collision zones, continental rifts, and strike-slip faults. We'll then consider hotspots and mantle plumes, which are not a type of tectonic plate boundary per se, but are another location at which tectonism occurs, manifest in volcanic and seismic activity. We'll finish the lecture with a brief discussion of the principle of isostasy. Returning to the schematic of mantle convection shown in the first part of the lecture, note how in the upper left, two continents are being carried towards one another, like on a conveyor belt, as the intervening oceanic lithosphere is subducted deep into the mantle. Once all of the oceanic lithosphere between the two continents has disappeared, the continents will collide. Continental collision zones are the other type of convergent plate boundary, along with subduction zones. Continental crust has an average density of 2.8 g per cm3, compared to 3.2 g per cm3 for the upper mantle. Continental crust is therefore much too buoyant to be subducted. It would be like trying to push a pool float underwater in a swimming pool, it will constantly try to bob back up. When two continents meet at a convergent plate boundary, since neither can be subducted, the continental crust instead thickens, forming a mountain range that is compensated isostatically by a deep crustal route. The Himalayas and Tibetan Plateau depicted here are the premier example of an active continental collision zone, formed by the convergence of India, shown on the left, with Eurasia on the right. The collision initiated 50-60 million years ago, in the early Cenozoic period, and India continues to converge with Eurasia at a rate of about 50 mm per year. Rather than either plate subducting, the Indian and Eurasian crust instead thickens beneath Tibet to around 70-80 km. Because of isostasy, a form of gravitational equilibrium that we'll discuss at the end of the lecture and explore in our first activity class, this crustal thickening raised surface elevations to the highest on the entire planet. The tallest mountains of the Himalaya are more than 8 km above sea level, and the deepest valleys are still around 2 km above sea level, giving an average elevation of about 5 km. The Tibetan Plateau to the north of the Himalaya contains much lower relief, but also averages about 5 km in elevation. Continental collision zones differ from subduction zones in other important ways too. Most notably, they are much, much broader. The width of the India-Eurasia collision zone, covering most of the northeastern quadrant of this topographic map, is about 3,000 km, about 10 times the typical width of a subduction zone. The Himalaya form the leading edge of this plate boundary, but the collision causes crustal shortening and thickening far to the north, as indicated both in the high topography and by representative GPS velocities. Other notable mountain belts within this collision zone include several of the world's tallest ranges after the Himalaya, such as the Pamirs and Tian Shan. The northern edge of the collision zone is probably best defined by the Altai and Sion ranges in Mongolia and southern Siberia, shown in the far northeastern corner of this map. Everything between this and the Himalaya is essentially a diffuse plate boundary zone. The width of the Arabia-Eurasia continental collision zone, shown in the central left part of the map, is lesser at around 1,000 km, but is still several times the width of a typical subduction zone. This collision essentially encompasses the entire country of Iran, plus bits of neighbouring countries to the west and north. Later on in the course, we'll learn how the diffuse nature of continental collision zones makes characterising earthquake hazards in these regions particularly challenging, using Iran as our example. Continental plates can also form divergent boundaries, known as continental rifts. How and why rifting initiates is an area of active research. It may start when a mantle temperature anomaly occurs underneath a continent. Because the warmer mantle is less dense, the continental crust will be uplifted. The uplifted crust may become gravitationally unstable, and its subsequent gravitational collapse results in extension and the formation of a new divergent plate boundary. Crustal extension leads to crustal thinning, and thinned crust subsides because of isostasy. This leads to the formation of a central depression, known as a rift valley. The best known continental rift and rift valley is the East African rift, where the African plate is slowly separating into a main western Nubian plate and a smaller eastern Somalia plate plotted on this map. Rifting is most advanced at the north end of the rift, in the Afar lowlands of Ethiopia, Eritrea and Djibouti, and has gradually propagated southwards, where it is less developed. The rift currently terminates somewhere around Mozambique or Madagascar. The southwards propagation results in a spectrum of tectonic landforms and volcanic activity. In central East Africa, the rift splits into two branches. The eastern branch is characterised by tall stratovolcanoes like Mount Kenya and Mount Kilimanjaro, shown here. We'll cover this type of volcano in great detail later in the course. In the western branch, Lake Kivu is a freshwater lake that contains large volumes of dissolved volcanic gases, including carbon dioxide and methane. The lake waters occasionally overturn, releasing these gases in what is known as a limnic eruption. The cloud of gas is capable of suffocating wildlife, livestock and even humans. Past eruptions are known to have caused local mass extinction events, and a future overturn poses a threat to 2 million people currently living within the Kivu Basin. Volcanism in the East Africa rift is most developed in the northern part of the rift, where the volcanism looks very different. At the northern end, the Afar Triangle is a broader depression characterised by dark basaltic lava flows and extensional normal faulting, shown in this aerial photograph. Although Afar lies just above sea level, these volcanic rocks are in fact incipient oceanic crust. If you drained the ocean, this is what a mid-ocean ridge would look like at its crest. In Afar, continental crustal thinning has proceeded far enough that mantle asthenosphere can rise very close to the surface, where it undergoes decompression melting, just like at a mid-ocean ridge. The only difference is that Afar still lies just above sea level. Geologists working in Afar can therefore witness the birth of a new ocean basin. If current plate motions continue for millions of years, the Somali Plate will completely split from the Nubian Plate and a new ocean will form in between. A cross-section across this region in several million years' time would look something like this. The plate boundary itself is now a mid-ocean ridge, where seafloor spreading generates new oceanic crust. At either end of the cross-section, we see the stretched continental crust involved in earlier continental rifting. The region where the stretched continental crust from continental rifting thins out into oceanic crust from seafloor spreading is known as a passive continental margin, and there are two of them on this cross-section. Note that these are not plate boundaries. Passive continental margins separate the continental part of a plate from the oceanic part of the same plate. This map shows in light blue all of the world's passive continental margins. They include the eastern seaboards of North and South America, except for around the Caribbean, as well as the western coastline of Europe and almost the entire circumference of Africa. In contrast, active continental margins, shown in pink, are current plate boundaries. They are where oceanic crust is being consumed beneath the continent in a subduction zone, forming a continental arc, or where the oceanic and continental plates are sliding past each other along strike-slip faults. The entire western seaboard of the Americas is formed of active continental margins, for the most part subduction zones, but with stretches of strike-slip faulting, such as along the San Andreas and Queen Charlotte faults. This map is the simple reason why the western margins of the Americas have such elevated seismic and volcanic hazards relative to the eastern margins. Here we see a perspective view of the bathymetry of the North Atlantic Ocean, with the passive margins formed as continental rifting evolved into seafloor spreading, marked by steep continental slopes. Recall that North America, Europe and Africa were once fused together as part of the supercontinent Pangaea. Africa, then part of Gondwanaland, rifted from North America, then part of Laurasia, in the Jurassic period. Later, starting in the Cretaceous, Laurasia split into ancestral North America in the west, called Laurentia, and Eurasia in the east. Rifting of the North Atlantic therefore commenced in the south before propagating northwards. And the passive margins along the eastern seaboard of North America can be matched to those in western Africa and western Europe to recreate the geometry of the original rift. Note that the lines joining the counterpart passive margins are perpendicular to the active mid-Atlantic ridge. They follow the same trend as deep scars in the ocean seafloor, called fracture zones, which we will discuss shortly. Sometimes, for reasons that are often unclear, divergent plate margins cease before continental rifting can transition into seafloor spreading. This leads to what's known as a fossil plate boundary, and a type of fossil boundary known as a failed rift. This comprises thinned continental crust, but no oceanic crust. Our perspective view of the North Atlantic region shows three such failed rifts. The Labrador Sea opened in the Paleocene Epoch, from about 60 to 40 million years ago. You can see from the bathymetry of the seafloor that the continental crust was thinned substantially. The North Sea, between the UK and Norway, formed in the Cretaceous period. In this case, the continental crust was only thinned a little, barely to the point that it lies below current sea level. In fact, average water depths in the North Sea are just 100 metres. The St Lawrence Rift is much older, forming in the Proterozoic and early Paleozoic eras. Its ancient faults still host occasional intraplate earthquakes, and are largely responsible for the seismic hazard that exists in Ontario and Quebec. We've now looked in detail at two of the three main types of tectonic plate boundary. Convergent boundaries manifest in mid-ocean ridges and continental rifts, and convergent boundaries, namely subduction zones and continental collision zones. The third major type is the strike-slip boundary. These neither create nor consume lithosphere, and they're sometimes called conservative plate boundaries, since the lithosphere is conserved as the two plates simply slide past each other laterally. Transform faults, depicted in this schematic, are a type of strike-slip boundary that accommodate relative motions of oceanic plates between mid-ocean ridge segments. Note that the transform fault connects the ends of adjacent sections of a mid-ocean ridge. Along the transform fault, the two oceanic plates move laterally past each other. Major strike-slip boundaries also occur in continental settings, such as in California, where North American continental lithosphere slides past Pacific continental lithosphere along the San Andreas fault. This is known as a right-lateral strike-slip fault, since whichever plate you stand on, the opposite plate moves towards your right. Other strike-slip boundaries include left-lateral faults. Triple junctions are where three tectonic plates and their plate boundaries meet at a single point. They are further divided by the types of plate boundary that meet. The Rodriguez triple junction in the Indian Ocean is a ridge-ridge-ridge triple junction because three mid-ocean ridges connect. The Antarctic, African, and Indian plates are all diverging from each other in this region. There are two triple junctions off western North America, one of them close to Vancouver Island. The Queen Charlotte triple junction is a ridge-transform-subduction triple junction, where the Juan de Fuca mid-ocean ridge, the Queen Charlotte transform fault, and the Cascadia subduction zone all meet. The Mendocino triple junction off northern California is known as a transform-transform-subduction triple junction. Two strike-slip faults, the San Andreas fault in the south and the Mendocino transform fault in the west, conjoin with the southern end of the Cascadia subduction zone. Here in Victoria, we live in a pretty remarkable tectonic setting, in which all three types of tectonic plate boundary and a triple junction all lie close by, just offshore to the west and northwest of Vancouver Island. For scientists who study earthquakes and tectonics, like myself, this presents some amazing research opportunities. These plate boundaries are outlined in this nice cartoon map and cross-section. It's vital that you familiarise yourselves with the plates, plate motions and plate boundaries represented in this figure. You should know which type of plate boundaries are represented by the numbers 1, 2 and 3, and you should be able to sketch the cross-section across the two boundaries depicted along the lower edge of the figure. Hot spots are regions of volcanism and seismicity that form above rising mantle plumes, vertical jets of buoyant mantle rock heated at the core mantle boundary. Mantle plumes are warmer than the ambient mantle, and thus less dense, and it is this density contrast that drives the material upwards. Like the upwelling below mid-ocean ridges, mantle plumes form part of the convection of the mantle. However, unlike mid-ocean ridges, plumes do not form plate boundaries themselves. Indeed, many of them are situated in the middle of a plate, well away from a plate boundary. This map shows the location of major plumes and hot spots around the world. Many, like the Hawaiian hot spot, occur in the middle of plates, in this case the Pacific plate. A few, like the Iceland hot spot, coincide with plate boundaries, in this case the mid-Atlantic ridge. Because they are largely obscured by overlying tectonic plates, many aspects of mantle plumes are controversial. For example, geophysicists continue to debate the number of plumes, the depths at which they originate, and whether or not they are stationary or move through geological time. Volcanism at hot spots, such as the Lava River shown in this photograph in Hawaii, occurs for different reasons to that at mid-ocean ridges and subduction zones. The peridotite within the plume is warmer than normal mantle material, so the geothermal gradient, plotted here in red, shifts from its normal position, shown in the graph on the left, to higher temperatures, shown in the graph on the right. This allows it to cross over the solidus, plotted in green, leading to partial melting. The tectonic plates that plumes impact upon can move over them. Northwestward motion of the Pacific plate over the Hawaiian hot spot has formed a linear chain of volcanic islands and seamounts, depicted in this northwest-to-southeast cross-section through the Hawaiian archipelago. About 5 million years ago, the island of Kauai sat over the hot spot. The volcanic rocks generated are preserved in the layered basalts shown in this photograph, but there is no longer active volcanism on this island. Later, about 3 million years ago, the island of Oahu sat over the hot spot and formed the active volcanic centre at the time. Nowadays, volcanic activity is centred around the shield volcano Mauna Loa on the Big Island of Hawaii. In the future, the Big Island will move northwestwards, off the hot spot, and a new volcanic centre will take its place. This zoomed-out bathymetric map of the northern Pacific Ocean shows that the Hawaiian plume is much longer-lived than 5 million years. The numbers on this map refer to radiogenic ages in millions of years of volcanic rocks sampled from the Hawaiian islands and from the Emperor Seamount chain to its northwest. The Hawaiian islands stretch about 3,000 kilometres from the Big Island, denoted by the zero in the southeastern corner of the map, past Kauai, aged 5 million years, to the Midway Atoll, a tiny island formed 28 million years ago. The Emperor Seamount chain stretches northward for another 3,000 kilometres, all the way to the Aleutian subduction zone, where the northernmost seamount is dated at about 80 million years. The cause of the kink in the chain of volcanoes, at about 43 million years, is still debated. Many scientists think that this was caused by an abrupt change in the motion of the Pacific plate, likely because of some kind of tectonic plate reorganisation that occurred in the Pacific at that time. Prior to 43 million years ago, the Pacific plate moved northwards over the Hawaiian mantle plume. Since 43 million years ago, it's switched to its current northwestwards direction of motion. However, other scientists contend that the kink was caused by the motion of the Hawaiian mantle plume itself. The most famous continental plume and hotspot is probably Yellowstone, in the US state of Wyoming. The light-coloured volcanic rocks here differ dramatically from the dark basaltic rocks of Hawaii, reflecting that the Yellowstone plume impacts a continental plate rather than an oceanic one. The Yellowstone hotspot track, a suite of volcanic rocks that slices across Oregon, Idaho and into Wyoming, records the westward motion of North America over the stationary mantle plume since about 14 million years ago. The most recent of the major eruptions at Yellowstone occurred 640,000 years ago. Iceland lies on both a mid-ocean ridge and a hotspot. The combined effects of decompression melting from the mid-ocean ridge and a mantle thermal non-anomaly associated with the hotspot results in the eruption of huge volumes of magma. As a consequence, the oceanic crust beneath Iceland is much thicker than normal, and because of isostasy, this allows it to sit above sea level. This brings us to the final topic of this lecture, isostasy. Isostasy describes a gravitational equilibrium where the crust floats on the denser plastic asthenosphere at an elevation dependent on the crustal thickness and density. It is analogous to objects floating on liquid water, which has density 1.0 grams per centimetre cubed. The normal symbol for density is the Greek letter rho. Aluminium has density 0.05 grams per centimetre cubed, and therefore floats mostly above water level. Wood has density 0.5 grams per centimetre cubed, and floats about half above and half below water level. Icebergs have density 0.9 grams per centimetre cubed, and so they only just float and sit mostly below water level. The addition or subtraction of mass from a floating object leads to change in elevation or an isostatic adjustment. For example, if you swam over and sat on the iceberg, the iceberg would in turn rest a little deeper in the water. If you then jumped back into the water, the iceberg would pop back to its original elevation. You'll see that this iceberg is much larger than the one on the previous slide. The peak of the larger iceberg is higher above the water, and the bottom of the iceberg is similarly deeper. However, the proportions of the iceberg above and below the water are exactly the same, because the density is still 0.9 grams per centimetre cubed. Isostasy therefore explains why denser oceanic crust sits lower than lighter continental crust, resulting in deep ocean basins. It also explains why continental mountain ranges and plateaus are underlain by thicker crust and lithosphere than low-lying continental regions. This diagram shows a schematic slice or cross-section through some oceanic and continental crust. Isostasy tells us that the two are in gravitational balance. In other words, at some compensation depth within the asthenosphere, marked here by a dashed line, the overlying masses must be the same. Given knowledge of the thickness and density of one type of crust, we can calculate the thickness of the other. For example, oceanic crust is on average 7 kilometres thick, with density 3.0 grams per centimetre cubed, and it typically sits 5 kilometres below sea level, and seawater has density 1.0 grams per centimetre cubed. Continental crust has density 2.8 grams per centimetre cubed, and the asthenosphere, shown here in purple, has density 3.2 grams per centimetre cubed. Continental crust is in isostatic equilibrium with oceanic crust, allowing us to calculate the thickness of normal continental crust, that is, continental crust at about sea level, for example Vancouver Island. What we have to do is to balance the pressures at points A and B, at the compensation depth in the asthenosphere, below the oceanic crust at A, and the continental crust at B. Point A is under the ocean, the oceanic crust, and some unknown thickness of mantle, M. Point B is under the continent, of unknown thickness, C. You can see that C is equal to M plus 12 kilometres. The pressure at A is equal to the density times thickness of all of the layers above it. To keep things simple on paper, we'll use units of grams per centimetre cubed for density, but kilometres for thickness. Pressure at A is therefore 1 grams per centimetre cubed times 5 kilometres, plus 3 grams per centimetre cubed times 7 kilometres, plus 3.2 grams per centimetre cubed times M. The pressure at B is simply 2.8 grams per centimetre cubed times C. But C is equal to M plus 12 kilometres, so pressure at B becomes 2.8 grams per centimetre cubed plus 33.6. Subtracting the two, we have 5 plus 21 plus 3.2 M at A, equal to 2.8 M plus 33.6 at B. Rearranging to get the unknown, M, on one side of the equation, we get M equals 19 kilometres and C equals 31 kilometres. So the thickness of normal continental crust, with an elevation of around sea level, is about 31 kilometres. Isostasy also explains why tall continental mountain ranges are underlain by thickened crust, with a so-called crustal route extending down into what under normal thickness continental crust would be the mantle. In the first activity class, we'll do a similar calculation of the thickness of continental crust beneath mountain belts, using the example of the Tibetan plateau, which averages 5 kilometres in elevation. Finally, we'll apply the principles of isostasy to think about what happens to continents during and after an ice age. In an ice age, like the Pleistocene period between 2.6 million years ago and 12,000 years ago, thick ice sheets accumulated on the continents at high latitudes. This ice adds to the weight of the continental crust, which therefore sinks in order to maintain a constant pressure in the underlying mantle. The ductile asthenosphere would flow outwards and away in order to accommodate the sinkage of the continental crust. What would happen at the end of the ice age, as the climate warms, the ice melts and the meltwater flows back to the ocean. The asthenosphere would flow back in to retain the pressure equilibrium at depth. This flow will push the continent back upwards again, returning it to its original position before the ice age started. This type of isostatic uplift is known as post-glacial rebound, and it's analogous to the iceberg popping up as you jump back into the water. Since the ductile asthenosphere is highly viscous, and flows only very slowly, post-glacial rebound takes many thousands of years, as is recorded by these raised beaches in Killer Hick Took, or Bathurst Inlet, in Nunavut, northern Canada. Each beach shows where sea level was at a certain time in the past, but the global sea level has not dropped during this time, rather locally the crust has been rising out of the water. Many formerly glaciated regions are still uplifting today, as indicated by GPS studies. This map shows the rates at which GPS stations across eastern North America are either uplifting in red, or subsiding in blue. The region that was covered in ice during the Pleistocene is shown in red. The mantle flow that is driving this uplift is sourced from neighbouring regions, which are consequently subsiding slightly, as is shown by areas in blue. A nice coincidence is that Canada is on the rise, while America is falling. Uplift rates due to post-glacial rebound are even faster in western Canada. In northwestern BC and southwestern Yukon, for example, they reach 3cm a year, or 30mm a year. This is because this is an area of active deglaciation, whereas in eastern Canada most of the ice melted away around 10,000 years ago. This concludes our lecture.