In previous lectures, we looked closely at earthquake hazards. Today, we will turn our attention to earthquake risks and how we can go about reducing them. Remember that risk is equal to the hazard multiplied by the vulnerability. We cannot stop earthquakes from happening, but we can and should try to reduce our vulnerability to them. We can do so by investing in the four pillars of emergency management. Mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery. This is what this lecture is all about. In this first video, we'll start with a little revision on global trends in earthquake risks. We'll then consider the single most important factor in earthquake mitigation, which is building design. Firstly, let's remind ourselves why this is so important. We've seen this graph before. It shows the number of earthquakes per century over the past millennium that killed more than 10,000 people in grey or more than 50,000 people in red. The numbers have risen rapidly over the past few centuries with a significant jump in the 20th century alone. There are two possible explanations for this increase. The first is that the number of earthquakes has increased. But recall that globally, earthquakes of a given magnitude occur at well-defined frequencies, the so-called Gutenberg-Richter law. Though there are random year-on-year fluctuations in the numbers of the largest earthquakes, there is no evidence to suggest and no plausible explanation for any long-term trend in earthquake frequency. The second explanation is that the number of people at risk from earthquakes has risen. An earthquake will only cause this many fatalities if large numbers of people are exposed to it in the first place. This is the correct explanation for the increasing frequency of devastating earthquakes over the past 500 years. This graph provides graphical confirmation. It illustrates global population growth over the past two and a half millennia, the grey line labelled up the right-hand axis, together with an estimate for the cumulative number of people killed in all previous earthquakes, the black line labelled up the left-hand axis. The two lines follow each other quite closely, though it is fortunate that the increasing earthquake fatality count does not quite match the steep growth in population over the past 100 years. Another secondary factor is that the world's population is not only growing, but also urbanising. These five maps record the growth in the number of large cities with 1 million or more inhabitants, and megacities with over 10 million inhabitants. The most devastating of all earthquakes will be the ones that destroy large towns or cities, of which there are many more today than there were 100 or 200 years ago. Think back to the example of Tehran in a previous lecture. It has been destroyed four times in its recorded history, but on all four occasions it was only a small settlement. A very large earthquake there today could plausibly kill many tens or perhaps even hundreds of thousands of people. Indeed, Asia is the continent that is the most concerning in this regard. For a start, 60% of the world's population live there, and most of them within the area shown on these three maps. The upper map shows the population density. There are broad regions with very high population densities, especially in China and India, and a growing number of very large cities. Unfortunately, this same area also defines the Alpine-Himalayan belt, the diffuse belt of earthquake activity and mountain building, defined by the continental collisions of the Eurasian plate in the north with the African, Arabian and Indian plates in the south. The lower map shows an estimate of the strain rates across the three collision zones. We learned in previous lectures how in continent-continent plate boundaries, deformation is spread over wide regions, in stark contrast with oceanic plate boundaries, where deformation is focused on a main plate boundary fault. Essentially, all of the pink areas on this map are at threat from large earthquakes. These areas encompass whole countries like Iran and Turkey, combined population 160 million, as well as large parts of the two most populous countries in the world, China and India. The middle map shows the consequence, which is a large number of devastating earthquakes across the Alpine-Himalayan belt. This map shows those which have killed at least 5,000 people since the start of the 20th century. The circles are scaled by the number of fatalities and coloured by magnitude. Essentially, these three maps represent the equation vulnerability times hazard equals risk. The population map at the top represents exposure or vulnerability. The strain rate map at the bottom represents the seismic hazard. And the middle map shows the product with devastating earthquakes accounting for seismic risk. So how do we reduce these terrible impacts in the future? Recall the four pillars of emergency management, which we also considered back at the start of the course. Mitigation means preventing future hazards or reducing their effects. Preparedness means preparing to handle the emergency before it happens. Response means responding safely to the emergency once it happens. And recovery means getting back to normal after the emergency. We'll start by considering mitigation, meaning preventing future hazards or reducing their effects. Well, we can't prevent earthquakes from happening, but we can reduce their effects. The best way to do so is to ensure that buildings do not collapse during strong ground shaking. There is an adage amongst earthquake scientists and engineers that earthquakes don't kill people, buildings do. It is well illustrated by this photo from Kathmandu taken after the 2015 magnitude 7.8 Gorkha earthquake. Recall the videos from this earthquake that we watched previously, which showed very strong horizontal ground motions. Unfortunately, most buildings are designed to withstand vertical stresses, but not horizontal ones. Front and center of this photograph is a brick building that collapsed as a result of the horizontal shaking. However, in the background are several buildings, seemingly of about the same size and the same building materials, that would have experienced the same level of shaking, but which did not collapse. So there is therefore nothing to say that this building, nor any building, had to collapse in this earthquake. It was likely the result of poor design or shoddy construction. So how can we prevent buildings from collapsing from strong ground shaking in an earthquake? There are a number of factors we must consider. Firstly, the materials that buildings are made of are very important. Masonry buildings, meaning those made out of blocks such as bricks, are especially dangerous. All of the strength in a masonry building arises from the weight of brick upon brick. This is fine for withstanding vertical stresses, such as from the weight of overlying stories or from a roof. But not for withstanding strong horizontal shearing, such as you get in a large earthquake. In Iran, buildings are traditionally built out of adobe or mud brick. In an earlier lecture, we learned that in the oasis town of Bam, 90% of these buildings were destroyed in the 2003 Bam earthquake, which is what is shown in this photo. Wood is a much better building material in earthquake prone regions. Whereas masonry is rigid, brittle and heavy, wood is flexible, lightweight and elastic. Compared to brick buildings, it is relatively unusual to see wood frame buildings collapse completely in an earthquake. This photo shows wood frame houses damaged, but not destroyed by the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. The inhabitants of these buildings might have had to rebuild their homes, but at least they survived the earthquake with, at worst, probably only minor injuries. They certainly fared much better in this earthquake than those living in brick buildings. Steel is an even better material for building frames. Very strong and like wood, flexible and elastic. Its main drawback is simply its high cost. It is therefore only a realistic good choice for expensive, larger buildings. This photograph shows the Levi's Stadium, home of the San Francisco 49ers American football team. The diagonal bracing is to help withstand horizontal shearing. This brings us to the next crucial factor, building design. Anchoring buildings properly to strong foundations is an especially important factor in safe building design. Small residential buildings are prone to sliding off their foundations if not properly anchored. This California wood frame home slid off its foundations in the 1989 magnitude 6.9 Loma Prieta earthquake. If you look closely, you can see that its cripple wall collapsed. Cripple walls are the short wood stud walls that enclose a crawl space under the first floor. They are used to elevate the dwelling above ground to allow access to utility lines or to level a dwelling built on a slope. Soft first story collapse is a common building failure mode in earthquakes. A soft story building is a multi-story building in which one or more floors, but usually the ground floor, has windows, wide doors, large unobstructed commercial spaces, parking spaces or garages, or other large openings that reduce its sheer strength. We can see that in this building in Kathmandu, which collapsed in the 2015 Gorkha earthquake, only a small proportion of the circumference of the building at ground level was actual wall. The inadequately braced ground level is less resistant than surrounding floors to lateral earthquake motion. So a disproportionate amount of the building's horizontal shearing is focused on that first story. Subject to disproportionate lateral stress, the floor becomes the weak point within the building, collapses through shearing or pancaking, and in turn results in the collapse of the entire building. This photo shows collapse of a wood frame home in the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in Northern California. The weak point here was clearly the garage. Here is similar damage in Southern California this time, following the 1971 magnitude 6.6 San Fernando earthquake. Again, a garage seems to be the weak point. The wide garage door provides virtually no sheer strength to the building. This is a famous photograph of soft first story collapse in the 1995 magnitude 6.9 Northridge earthquake, also in Southern California. Here, a large tuck under parking area was the weak point, and the building simply pancaked. This photo shows the badly damaged Palu Hospital after the 2018 magnitude 7.5 Palu earthquake in Sulawesi, Indonesia. On the left, what appears to be a four-story building has clearly been very badly impacted. However, if we inspect what the hospital looked like before the earthquake, we can see that this was in fact a five-story building. The ground story was completely crushed in the earthquake, pancaked flat to the point that it can no longer be seen. This video is of the soft first story collapse of a building in Mexico City in the 2017 magnitude 7.1 Puebla earthquake. The extremely unsafe design is evident even before the building collapses. Note that the ground floor is mainly made of garages. A shake table is an experimental apparatus that engineers use to test how buildings respond to shaking. Scaled buildings with different designs can be shaken with a wide range of simulated ground motions, including reproductions of actual earthquakes. In this example, we see an experiment that reproduces the effects of the 1952 magnitude 7.3 Kern County earthquake in California. At first, we see a very simple design of building undergoing severe shearing. Later, we see the dramatic improvement when brackets are placed at the corners of the building. Corner brackets are a simple and relatively low-cost way of improving a building's resistance to shearing. Reinforcing first stories is probably most important of all, due to the propensity for soft first story collapse. Braces, brackets, shear walls, bolts and steel frames can all reduce the likelihood of a building collapsing or sliding off its foundations. Nowadays, regulations mandate design features like these for all new buildings. A big problem is what to do with older buildings that precede stricter building regulations. Ideally, these should have to be modified or retrofitted. In much of California, buildings with tuck-under parking are now required by law to undergo soft story retrofits. An example of an older building with retrofitted steel reinforcements is shown on the right. However, retrofits are expensive and many property owners will be reluctant to do so without strict regulations and financial incentives. Historical red-brick masonry buildings are of particular concern across North America, including here in Victoria. These historically important and attractive buildings often cannot simply be torn down, and so they need to undergo expensive seismic retrofits if they are to stay standing in the next large earthquake. When you next visit downtown Victoria, have a look for examples of retrofitted buildings. This photo shows a good one. Notice the steel brace bridging and supporting the two large red-brick buildings, which should help prevent collapse of both buildings by reducing shearing. Sometimes the steel bracing is placed inside the building. This is an example from a store on Herald Street in Victoria's Chinatown. The bracing around the large store window and the diagonal braces across the wall are to help prevent soft first-story collapse. However, it is not only historic buildings that are at risk. The potential for magnitude 8 plus earthquakes here in Cascadia was only fully realised in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Updates to the building codes followed several years later in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Therefore, several older buildings on UVic's campus predate important updates to BC's building codes. Fortunately, many of the most at-risk buildings have been retrofitted. For example, the diagonal braces on the ground floor of the Cleryhugh building, shown in this photo, were installed in order to prevent soft first-story collapse. The large reinforced concrete frame retrofitted to the exterior of the Elliott building is another example installed to prevent shearing. Each building has a natural resonance, meaning a frequency at which it can vibrate, that depends primarily upon its size and secondarily upon its weight distribution, shape, materials, foundations and the substrate it is built on, whether hard bedrock or loose sediment. When seismic waves from an earthquake are of the same frequency, they can excite the natural resonance of a building, causing it to sway and greatly increasing the likelihood of collapse. There is a rule of thumb that buildings sway at a resonant frequency of about 10 Hz divided by the number of stories. Therefore, a one-story building vibrates at about 10 over 1, or 10 Hz, that is 10 times per second. A two-story building vibrates at about 10 over 2, or 5 Hz, that is about 5 times per second. And a 10-story building vibrates at about 10 over 10, or 1 Hz, that is 1 time per second. Next, we'll watch a pair of short videos. In the first, watch a nice laboratory demonstration of the resonant frequency effect. In the second video, watch a skyscraper in central Tokyo sway during the 2011 magnitude 9 Tohoku earthquake. The skyscraper is a 54-story building, so by the rule of thumb, it should sway at about 0.2 Hz, or 1 cycle of motion every 5 seconds. Try to determine whether the rule of thumb holds in this case as you watch the video. The idea of the BOSS model is that different height buildings will respond to different frequencies of horizontal ground motion. A tall building will respond to very slow or low frequency oscillations of the ground. So if I move the base slowly, back and forth, I can get the tall building to oscillate, where the intermediate and short buildings are not moving. If I move it more briskly, I can dial in the rate of horizontal oscillation so that I move the center building, the intermediate height building, and the short and the tall ones are barely moving. To get the short building to oscillate, you need to move the base very briskly back and forth and dial in to the natural frequency of the short building, and we can see that the intermediate and tall buildings are barely moving. Buildings will be affected most by seismic waves of the same frequency as the building's resonant frequency. Seismic wave frequency depends on many factors, including earthquake magnitude, mechanism, depth, distance, and the local geology. This can cause interesting effects in which certain earthquakes cause damage preferentially in buildings of a certain size. One of the best examples of this effect was for two earthquakes that damaged Mexico City. In the 1985 magnitude 8.0 Michoacán earthquake on the subduction megathrust fault 400 kilometers west of Mexico City, damage was focused in large 5 to 20 story buildings. Around 10,000 people were killed in this earthquake. But in the 2017 magnitude 7.1 Puebla earthquake, an intermediate depth or intraslab earthquake around 100 kilometers south of Mexico City, damage was focused in smaller buildings, those up to about six stories. The seismic waves at Mexico City were higher frequency in the 2017 earthquake because this earthquake was smaller in magnitude and much closer in distance to the city. 370 people died in this earthquake. One good way of reducing dangerous resonance is to place shock absorbers within the structure that dampen the vibrations, as demonstrated in this short video. However, as you can imagine, this is quite expensive to do in buildings, particularly as part of a retrofit. Another way of reducing vibrations is using base isolation. Devices such as ball bearings, wheels, or shock absorbers are placed on the ground to absorb part of the earthquake energy, thereby isolating the building itself from the ground. The Cube building, Q-U-B-E, in downtown Vancouver is a particularly clever example of base isolation. The main building hangs from a central vertical support and is not itself directly in contact with the ground. It was even built this way from the top down. In a large earthquake, the ground beneath the Cube would move back and forth, but the Cube will hang in position. There will be minimal shearing to the structure, and so any damage will likely be minor.