In the second lecture video, we'll look at some tsunamis and one seiche that were triggered by landslides, the four case studies in the 1958 Lituya Bay Tsunami in Alaska, the 27 Nugatsiak Tsunami in Greenland, the 1929 Grand Bank Tsunami in Atlantic Canada, and the 1959 Hegman Lake Seiche in Montana. Though none of the four case studies are from here in British Columbia, all four are in some ways relevant to us locally. The Lituya Bay and Nugatsiak tsunamis occurred in fjords, which of course characterize much of British Columbia's coastline. The Grand Bank tsunami was triggered by a collapse of the steep continental slope along Canada's Atlantic Passive Margin, and similar steep submarine slopes exist offshore Vancouver Island. And the Hegman Lake Seiche in Montana occurred in a lake not unlike hundreds in our own province. Furthermore, three of today's causative landslides were triggered themselves by earthquakes, and of course BC is Canada's most seismically active province. Two of the case studies may also have been exacerbated by anthropogenic climate change, which is also known to be impacting BC. The first of our case studies is the 1958 Lituya Bay Tsunami. Lituya Bay is located in southeastern Alaska, along the Pacific North America plate boundary. Recall that this is a strike-slip plate boundary, with the North America plate sliding southeastwards, and the Pacific plate moving northwestwards. In BC, the strike-slip fault that constitutes this plate boundary is known as the Queen Charlotte Fault. Its northern continuation in southeastern Alaska is known as the Fairweather Fault. This image shows a zoomed-in Google Earth perspective view of Lituya Bay. It consists of a narrow fjord around 12km long and 2-3km wide. There is a narrow spit at the entrance to the bay. The area is densely forested and completely unsettled by humans. Behind the bay is the tall, heavily glaciated Fairweather Range. The Fairweather Fault follows the edge of these high mountains, cutting right across the head of the bay. On 9th July 1958, at 10.15pm, a magnitude 7.8 earthquake struck the Fairweather Fault. The epicentre was located just to the southeast of this map, but the fault section showed here slipped by about 6m. The earthquake triggered collapse of a rock mass on a steep slope at the head of the fjord. The scar left behind by the landslide can still clearly be made out in the satellite imagery today, circled in red. A giant slab of rock, with a volume of around 40 million cubic metres, fell directly into the bay from a height of around 900m. Note that this slope had been probably impacted by the retreat of a large glacier, known as the Lituya Glacier, visible in the background of this image. Erosion by the glacier and loss of support as the ice retreated may have debuttressed the toe of the slope, a possible precondition of this landslide. We'll return to this point later on in discussing this case study. The fall triggered a wave in the fjord that ran up and over the headland opposite, and then raced to the mouth of the fjord. The wave had a maximum run-up height of an incredible 524m above sea level, as indicated by the elevation at which trees had been stripped from the headland. Waves with run-up heights of hundreds of metres are sometimes classified as mega-tsunami, and the Lituya Bay mega-tsunami is the largest such wave ever recorded. Scientists initially struggled to comprehend how such an extreme run-up could have occurred, since the rock volume involved in the initial slide did not appear sufficient to get water half a kilometre up the opposite headland. Some scientists proposed that the landslide had entrained ice or glacial sediment at the toe of the Lituya Glacier. The scientists in the following short video used a scaled laboratory analogue model of the landslide to propose an alternative explanation. What we have up here is a very powerful pneumatic landslide generator, with the red box where the gravel is filled in to mimic the landslide. The red box is accelerated down the ramp at high speeds, the flap opens and the landslide is released to impact the water. The scientists here made a detailed analysis of what happened at Lituya Bay, when 90 million tonnes of rock hit the water. They wanted to see how this impact had released enough energy to create a giant wave able to reach half a kilometre high. We adapted our model to mimic a cross-section of Lituya Bay. Up here we have the landslide generator, representing the mountain where the rock fell off. At the other end we have a ramp representing the headland where the wave ran up to. And what we found when we ran the experiment was fascinating. What we found explains how a wave could reach the extraordinary height of 520 metres. A high-speed landslide impacted the water, the water moved away so fast that it couldn't flow behind the landslide, creating a large air cavity, displacing far more water than the landslide volume itself. And this explains how a wave can have enough energy to run up half a kilometre and clear out everything in its way. The speed and size of the Lituya Bay landslide explains how the wave there could be so big when it was generated. This wave did not travel far, it struck land almost immediately. But mega-tsunami are also able to cross whole oceans. This photograph was captured soon after the event. The landslide scar is the dark hillside at the head of the bay. And the bare, tree-stripped hillside opposite can also be made out. The wave then travelled the length of the fjord, probably at a speed of around 150 kilometres per hour, reaching the entrance to the bay after about five minutes. The wave snapped and tore away trees from above the waterline as it went, and the areas of destroyed forest are recognisable as the light areas around the edges of the bay. Though this region was, and still is, uninhabited, there were three small boats in the bay at the time of the landslide, the Edry, the Badger and the Sunmoor. All three were anchored near the entrance to the bay, and the wave was about 30 metres high at this point. The Edry managed to turn into the wave, rode over it and down the other side, and did not sink. A father and son present on the boat provided an incredible eyewitness account of the earthquake, landslide and tsunami. The Badger was carried over the spit at the entrance to the fjord and deposited on the other side, foundering on the rocks and sinking. Fortunately, her crew, a husband and wife, were able to escape the wreck in their skiff with just the clothes they were wearing and a chair for a paddle. The Sunmoor tried to outrun the wave, but was caught by it and was engulfed. The boat and her crew of two were tragically lost. Years afterwards, the run-up marks were still visible as a trim line, a demarcation in the vegetation with young growth below and older growth above. Prior to the 1958 tsunami, a geologist with the United States Geological Survey had been studying evidence for the occurrence of large waves in Lituya Bay. The geologists had documented evidence for at least four previous large waves dating back an estimated 100 years or so, though until the 1958 event occurred, their cause was unclear. All of these waves were significant in size, with run-ups of up to 150 metres, but shoreline evidence for all of them was removed by the 1958 wave. Clearly, landslide-induced mega-tsunami are a recurring hazard in Lituya Bay. Furthermore, it's thought that the frequency of landslide-induced mega-tsunami is likely increasing at high latitudes, as the world's glaciers rapidly melt. In 2015, a huge landslide in Tarnfjord, an inlet of Icy Bay, 270 kilometres up the Alaskan coastline from Lituya Bay, caused a mega-tsunami with a run-up height of 190 metres. Fortunately, nobody witnessed this event first-hand, and in fact it was first discovered by seismologists who picked up the seismic wave signal from the initial landslide. The volume of this landslide was estimated to be about 76 million cubic metres, around double that of the Lituya Bay landslide. The 2015 mega-tsunami was somewhat smaller because only about two-thirds of the landslide volume entered the fjord, and it did so at a lower trajectory and thus a slower velocity. However, it still counts as the world's fourth-largest mega-tsunami recorded over the past century. The following video explains how rapid retreat of glaciers in this region, caused by anthropogenic global warming, was likely a key precondition of this landslide. The landslide that occurred in Icy Bay in October of 2015, no one was there to see it, thank goodness, but it was discovered by some seismologists. It caused a local tsunami that, at its peak, we now know, roared down the valley with a wave 185 metres high. Plants and debris were swept off the mountainside. It swept right across the airstrip at Kajit Point, essentially destroying that airstrip and then roaring out to sea. To someone who loves geology, that is an exciting event, but we can only be excited about it because we learned about it after the fact and we know that no one was hurt by it. But those things are going to be happening more and more in mountains that used to be sort of propped up by glacier ice and if you remove that glacier ice, if you shrink that glacier or remove it entirely, those slopes are thought to have a higher propensity for landsliding because there's nothing holding them up. It's something that we're going to have to pay a lot more attention to as glacier retreat makes these phenomena even more common. Although the effects of the 1958 and 2015 tsunamis within these narrow inlets were extreme, they had no impact outside these fjords. Recall that the geographic reach of a tsunami wave is governed chiefly by the volume of water displaced. In these cases, the water volumes likely approximates the rock volume of the causative landslides, a few tens of millions of cubic metres. However, there are 1,000,000 cubic metres in one cubic kilometre, so a rock volume of a few 10 million cubic metres is only a few percent of a cubic kilometre. Recall from the 2004 Indian Ocean and 2011 Tohoku tsunamis how the water volume displaced by the causative megathrust earthquakes was tens to a few hundred cubic kilometres. This is why they were able to impact entire ocean basins. A related point is because mega tsunamis like those at Lutuya Bay and Tarnfjord are localised disasters, technology-based warning systems cannot work quickly enough to help people just a few kilometres from the source. Our next case study is a tragic illustration of this limitation. Nugatsiak is a small community on an island just off the west coast of Greenland at 71 degrees north. It is situated on the coastline of an inlet known as the Karat Fjord. On 17 June 2017, in the middle of the night, a tsunami devastated the town, sweeping 11 houses into the sea and killing four people, out of a population of just 84. The following video shows what was probably the largest tsunami wave, though it's clear from the start of the video that it wasn't the first. This video was made in Cooperation with the Australian Government. Learn more at alaskagranny.com Please subscribe to the AlaskaGranny channel. In this second video, it's again clear at the start that an earlier wave has already flooded and damaged much of the settlement. AlaskaGranny.com Please subscribe to the AlaskaGranny channel. Please subscribe to the AlaskaGranny channel. Please subscribe to the AlaskaGranny channel. The tsunami occurred a few minutes after a magnitude 4.2 earthquake that was recorded on regional seismograms such as this one. The station code SFJD stands for Sondre Stjomfjord, another settlement on the coast of Greenland about 500 km south of Nugatsiak. The vertical component of the seismogram is shown. Because of the scaling of fault slip with earthquake magnitude, which we discussed back in the earthquakes module, an earthquake this size would likely generate at most a few centimetres of surface displacement, certainly far too little to have generated a tsunami wave like the one seen in the videos. However, if we compare this seismogram to one for a typical magnitude 4 earthquake recorded at a similar distance, like the example shown here, we can see some clear differences. In particular, the Nugatsiak seismogram lacks any distinct P-wave and S-wave and surface wave arrivals, and instead appears much more chaotic. This is the classic signature of a landslide-induced seismic event. Reconnaissance flights taken after the disaster showed clear evidence for a large, fresh rock avalanche in the upper part of Karatfjord, around 30 km from Nugatsiak. The light area, high up on the hill slide, is freshly exposed bedrock of the landslide headscarp. The landslide probably initiated as a rockfall, which then smashed into the scree slope below, broke into debris, and proceeded downslope to enter the fjord. Satellite reconnaissance soon confirmed that the timing of the landslide coincided with that of the disaster in Nugatsiak. In other words, the landslide was indeed the source of the tsunami wave. The volume of the landslide has been estimated from differencing before and after digital elevation models of this hill slide at about 55 million cubic metres, approximately the same volume as the 1958 Lituya Bay landslide. Also similar to Lituya Bay, the vertical distance between the top of the landslide and the fjord is about 1,200 metres. Zooming in further, we see evidence for an incipient landslide just to the left of the headscarp. Clearly the tsunami hazard in Karatfjord remains high. Like with the earlier Lituya Bay and Tarnfjord landslides, it has been suggested that rapid global warming may have contributed to the instability of hill slopes like these. The retreat of thick glaciers removes an important source of support from the toe of the slope, while melting of permafrost may also weaken the hill slopes above and make them more prone to water saturation. This video shows some nice aerial footage of these landslides. It starts over the incipient landslide and then pans to the fresh scar of the rockfall responsible for the Nugatsiak tsunami. Field reconnaissance also revealed icebergs washed ashore by the tsunami, indicating run-ups as high as 90 metres above sea level near the landslide source. This particular iceberg is on the shore directly opposite the landslide on the far side of Karatfjord. It's estimated that it took the tsunami about 8 minutes to travel 30 kilometres down the Karatfjord to Nugatsiak. As we well know, this wave velocity is dependent upon the water depth within the fjord. By that point its height was much diminished, with estimates of run-up heights of about 10 metres and maximum inundation distance of about 150 metres at Nugatsiak. Clearly this was still large enough to devastate the small settlement and sweep many buildings into the fjord. Our next case study is the 1929 Grand Banks tsunami, one of the worst natural disasters of recent history in Canada, killing 28 people. The Grand Banks refers to a wide marine plateau with shallow water depths that lies south-east of Newfoundland. Directly the Grand Banks are part of the continental shelf along North America's Atlantic Passive Margin. The region is well known as one of the richest fishing grounds in the world. This is due to the mixing of cold Labrador current from the north with the warm waters of the Gulf Stream from the south, which helps to bring nutrients to the surface and supports the food chain. On 18th November 1929, a large earthquake occurred close to the edge of the Grand Banks continental shelf, the so-called continental slope. Modelling of the available seismogram records suggests that it was about magnitude 7.2, and it is a clear example of an intraplate earthquake occurring a long way away from the closest plate boundary, in this case the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, about 2,000 kilometres to the east. The earthquake was felt as far away as Montreal and New York, and reached modified Macaulay intensities of 8 or severe at Cape Breton Island in northern Nova Scotia. However, there are no records of any fatalities from the earthquake itself. One of the more unusual impacts of the earthquake was that it severed several transatlantic telegraph cables that were used for communications between North America and Europe. The locations of these cables are labelled H to L on this bathymetric cross-section across the continental margin and shelf. The x-axis shows distance from the shelf, and the y-axis shows seafloor depth. Note the pronounced vertical exaggeration. However, communications through these seafloor cables were not all lost at once at the time of the earthquake. Instead, a cable 100 kilometres from the earthquake was snapped about one hour after the earthquake. A cable 300 kilometres away was cut after about three hours. And three cables at around 600 kilometres distance were severed between 9 and 13 hours after the earthquake. The best explanation for this pattern is that the cables were cut sequentially by a turbidity current. Turbidity currents are rapid, downhill, underwater currents of dense, sediment-laden water. They are often sourced by large landslides on steep submarine slopes. But once they have picked up momentum, they can travel long distances across flat, abyssal plains. This video shows some nice scaled examples of turbidity currents generated with a laboratory apparatus. The video is about two minutes long. ...flows, usually at the bottom of the ocean or lakes or in sometimes quiescent pools and rivers. ...are shown numerous examples of turbidity currents in laboratory apparatus. This first example is a turbidity current running down a ramp. You can see clearly the turbulent head, the body, and the tail behind. Seen from the other side, it looks very similar. Once again, you can see the turbulent head, the body behind it, and the very end of the tail. This is a front view with a turbidity current running toward you. This was taken with a GoPro. Here's a turbidity current running again down the same slope. Again, you can see the anatomy of the turbidity current. Once again, we're on a turbidity current running down a ramp, but this time entering into an open basin, spreading out in a low-base shape, and encountering an obstacle, which it goes around almost over. This is the same turbidity current, except this time shown from the GoPro inside the actual tank. And again, from one of the GoPros in the tank, but looking down on the turbidity current below. Lastly, here's a video of the turbidity current looking down from above. Subsequent mapping of the seafloor bathymetry around the earthquake epicenter showed that the steep continental slope that borders the Grand Banks is not a smooth planar surface, but is pockmarked with landslide scars and submarine canyons. One particularly large landslide scar, traced in black on a bathymetric map on the left, is interpreted as the earthquake epicenter. Another large landslide scar, traced in black on a bathymetric map on the left, is interpreted as the likely source of the 1929 turbidity current. It's been estimated that the landslide may have had a volume as large as 100 cubic kilometers. This would make it the largest landslide of modern times anywhere in the world. These seismic reflection profiles provide a cross-sectional image of the landslide source area. The y-axis is two-way travel time, which is equivalent to depth, and there is a vertical exaggeration to the cross-section of around 7.5. You can see that the horizontal sedimentary layering is broken by some slightly steeper structures that look a little bit like faults. These are interpreted as the basal failure planes of some large slump-like rotational landslides. Failure of slumps like these is not only likely what fed the turbidity currents, but also what generated a subsequent tsunami that formed the most significant impact of this disaster. In the landslide source area, the abrupt increase in seafloor depth as the edge of the continental shelf collapsed would have caused the sea surface to drop downwards. The resulting deviation in sea surface height would then have spread outwards as a tsunami wave. Because the principal motion of the seafloor and the ocean water column was downwards, simulations of the tsunami showed that the first arriving wave at all azimuths was likely a trough. However, this would quickly have been followed by a positive wave crest with the potential to inundate regional coastlines. Tsunami waves were recorded as far away as Bermuda and Portugal, but the damage and devastation was concentrated in southern Newfoundland, and in particular a peninsula known as the Burrin Peninsula. The tsunami waves arrived about two and a half hours after the earthquake here. Wave heights averaged 4 to 7 metres, with run-up heights as high as 15 to 30 metres reported where inundation had been focused by coastal inlets. The tsunami killed 28 people here, making this the deadliest earthquake in Canada in recent history. Because communications were cut off, the tragedy was not actually reported to the outside world until a whole three days after the disaster. These historical photographs show damage from the tsunami. Many of the photographs remind me of the scenes in Nugatsiak, with houses swept into the ocean or toppled onto their sides. Though the tectonic setting is very different, British Columbia is also susceptible to submarine landslides of this type, particularly failure of the steep slope separating the continental shelf of the North America Plate, just offshore western Vancouver Island, from the deep abyssal plain of the Juan de Fuca Plate. Note that the continental slope here looks rather similar to the one south of the Grand Banks, exhibiting spectacular submarine canyons carved by turbidity currents. Like in the Grand Banks, the largest turbidity currents are probably triggered by nearby large earthquakes. In fact, coring and dating of sedimentary layers deposited in these canyons by turbidity currents is our best means of estimating the recent history of megathrust earthquakes along the Cascadia subduction zone. Of course, the tsunami resulting from a landslide triggered by one of these great earthquakes would likely be dwarfed by the wave generated concurrently by the earthquake itself. This isn't the only place we should be concerned about submarine slope failures, though. Parts of the Salish Sea between Vancouver Island and the mainland may also be susceptible. For example, a magnitude 7.5 earthquake near Courtenay in 1946 is known to have triggered submarine failures, which were in turn likely responsible for a two metre high tsunami observed on Texada Island. The tsunami wave was responsible for one or two fatalities in this event. Of even more concern, bathymetric mapping at the front of the Fraser River Delta just offshore Vancouver shows very clear evidence for landslide failures, submarine canyons and turbidity currents. Because of the proximity to built-up areas, a local tsunami here could potentially be very damaging. Our final case study is the 1959 Seiche wave in Hegburn Lake, a reservoir on the Madison River in southwestern Montana, just northwest of Yellowstone National Park. This is one of the worst natural disasters of recent history in the United States. It killed 28 people, by coincidence the same number that died in the Grand Banks disaster. Hegburn Lake is located in a distinct earthquake zone known as the Intermountain Seismic Belt, which runs from southern Utah through Idaho and Wyoming and into Montana, appearing to die out right about the Canadian border. The belt can be made out on this USGS seismic hazard map. Most earthquakes in this region involve normal faulting, and the region can be considered a slowly stretching continental rift. On 17 August 1959, just before midnight, a magnitude 7.5 earthquake struck Hegburn Lake. We'll see later on how the timing of the earthquake was extremely unfortunate, both that it occurred in the middle of the night and that it occurred during the late summer camping season in the Yellowstone region. This undoubtedly contributed significantly to the large death toll. The earthquake was large and shallow enough to generate a clear surface rupture, which is visible in this airborne LiDAR topographic map near Hegburn Dam at the northwestern end of Hegburn Lake Reservoir. The surface rupture is clearest on the right to the right of the red pin, which is where this spectacular field photograph was taken. Note how the rupture is characterized by a fault scarp rather than by lateral offsets. This was a normal faulting earthquake. The scarp can be followed for about 20 km along the northeastern shoreline of the reservoir. This second field photograph shows another clear section of surface rupturing. Note the geologists for scale in both photographs. Because the causative normal fault parallels the reservoir's shoreline, and the earthquake involved predominantly vertical motions, the earthquake had the effect of tilting the bed of the reservoir, pushing water to one side and triggering a seiche. The water then sloshed to and fro across the lake basin. The foreman of the dam, George Hungerford, was woken by the strong shaking and, fearing the worst, went to investigate the dam. As the dam came into view, he saw a wall of water overtopping it, perhaps 20 feet high. But when he got to the dam, there was no water left. The reservoir appeared dry. This is because the sloshing of the seiche wave had pushed the water over to the far side of the lake. But then the water came rushing back as the seiche wave continued to slosh around the reservoir basin. The second breach of the dam was smaller, with the water level overtopping the structure by about 3 to 4 feet. The photo shows Hungerford indicating his estimate of this flow height at the dam of the second wave. Subsequent analysis of a river gauge in the valley just below the dam indicated that the seiche wave had a period of about 17 minutes, and that it continued oscillating for around 12 hours. The seiche wave was not the only secondary hazard triggered by the earthquake. A few miles downstream, the shaking caused the collapse of a steep mountainside overlooking the Madison River. This aerial reconnaissance photograph, taken shortly after the disaster, points down the Madison Valley. Hegburn Lake is therefore situated behind the observer. The landslide source area and deposit are obvious. Known as the Madison Slide, the enormous debris slide completely blocked the valley, backing up the Madison River, just as a torrent of water approached from the seiche waves upstream. Combined, this led to the rapid formation of a lake, known as Earthquake Lake. This schematic shows the perspective view of the disaster. Hegburn Lake is the larger body of water on the right side of the scheme, with the dam that was overtopped by the seiche wave on the left. The Madison Slide is coloured red at the front of the scene. Earthquake Lake is the smaller body of water forming in Madison Valley between the slide and the dam. Unfortunately, there were around 50 families camping in this valley at the time of the earthquake. This was the middle of the summer, and the area is popular with tourists thanks to nearby Yellowstone National Park. These people were quickly trapped between the landslide and the floodwaters from the seiche wave. Because it was the middle of the night, many of the campers were caught unawares and could not escape in time, and 28 of them were drowned. This is a modern view of Earthquake Lake, looking downstream with the Madison Slide in the distance. Note the submerged dead trees in the lake, another example of a ghost forest. I highly recommend visiting this area if you ever go to Yellowstone Park. There is a fantastic visitor centre on the Madison Slide deposit, and smaller visitor sites along the Hegburn Fault Scarp. In my opinion, the Hegburn Lake disaster is highly relevant to us here in British Columbia, since our province contains many steep-sided lakes and reservoirs that are at risk from seiche waves and landslide tsunamis. These photographs show the impact of a tsunami wave triggered by a large debris slide in Chehalis Lake, 80 km east of Vancouver, on December 4, 2007. The debris slide, visible on the left of the upper photo and in the background of the lower one, is estimated to be about 3 million cubic metres. The impact of the tsunami, ripping out full-grown trees along the shoreline, is clear on the right and in the foreground. It was fortunate that this event occurred in the middle of the winter. There were no victims, and in fact nobody even witnessed the event. But had it occurred in the summer, as the Hegburn Lake disaster did, there would likely have been many people recreating on and around the lake. Furthermore, BC has dozens of dams situated in steep mountainous topography, potentially at risk from seiches or tsunami waves caused by landslides or earthquakes. Monitoring and mitigating landslides on the steep hill slopes that overlook these reservoirs is high priority for geotechnical engineers working at BC Hydro. Revelstoke Dam is a good example of one. And Micah Dam. This completes the lecture.