In the last lecture, we studied the fundamentals of tsunami and seiche waves. In this lecture, we'll look in more depth at some case studies. This first video will focus on tsunamis generated by megathrust earthquakes at subduction zones. Recall that this is the principal way of generating so-called ocean-wide tsunamis, those large enough to impact entire ocean basins. We'll look at some of the impacts from the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami and the 2011 Tōhoku Tsunami, both of which were introduced in the previous lecture. We'll also briefly look at the evidence for similar megathrust tsunamis here in Cascadia. First, though, I'd like to start with a little revision about the distribution of subduction zones and megathrust faults in the world's oceans. This plate tectonic map was introduced near the start of the course. I've highlighted here in blue the world's subduction zones. I don't expect you to memorize this map or know the names of all of the individual subduction zones. However, I would like you to recognize that megathrust tsunami hazards are not created equal. In other words, the world's various ocean basins have differing levels of hazard. The Pacific Ocean has easily the greatest hazard, since it is almost completely enclosed by subduction zones. These include the South American subduction zone, responsible for the 1960 magnitude 9.5 Valdivia earthquake, the Japan Trench, responsible for the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake, and of course the Cascadia subduction zone. The Indian Ocean probably has the next highest hazard, due to the Sunda subduction zone, responsible for generating the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami, as well as the shorter Makran subduction zone, offshore southeastern Iran and southwestern Pakistan. The Mediterranean Sea also has a high tsunami hazard, from the subduction of oceanic lithosphere belonging to the African plate, beneath the Calabrian Arc in Italy, and the Hellenic and Cyprus arcs in Greece and Turkey. The Atlantic Ocean contains a single subduction zone in the Eastern Caribbean Sea, where a relatively small section of the Atlantic oceanic lithosphere subducts westwards beneath the Lesser Antilles volcanic arc. However, one of the most devastating tsunamis in human history was caused by a crustal earthquake on the Africa-Eurasia plate boundary west of Portugal in 1755. 60 to 100,000 people were killed by the earthquake and tsunami. This event is a reminder that tsunamis can be generated by underwater earthquakes in other tectonic settings, not only subduction zones, even though these are what we focus on in this particular lecture. We'll now turn our attention to the 26th of December 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami, the deadliest in human history. It was caused by a magnitude 9.2 megathrust earthquake offshore northern Sumatra, Indonesia. The earthquake involved thrusting of the Sunda plate over oceanic lithosphere of the Indo-Australian plate. This earthquake was, and remains, the third largest on record, after only the 1960 magnitude 9.5 Valdivia, Chile earthquake, and the 1964 magnitude 9.4 Alaska earthquake. However, it beat even these events in one respect. The Sumatra earthquake ruptured an incredible 1500 kilometers of the plate boundary, making this the longest rupture ever recorded. We know this thanks in part to a technique known as backprojection seismology. Backprojections utilize dense arrays of seismometers as a kind of antenna to track the seismic energy released by the earthquake in space and time. The red star on the map on the right is the earthquake epicenter, located above the hypocenter, which is where slip in the earthquake initiated. As I play the backprojection video, warm colors will indicate the section of the megathrust fault that is rupturing at any given time. Time shown in the top left corner is sped up by a factor of around 60. The rupture takes about 500 seconds, or a little over 8 minutes, to unzip the 1500 kilometer rupture length. The average rupture velocity is therefore about 3 kilometers per second, which is quite typical for large earthquakes. Because most earthquake ruptures propagate at about the same velocity, the duration of shaking in an earthquake correlates approximately with the magnitude. So if you ever experience a minute or longer of shaking in an earthquake, you should know immediately that it is a very large earthquake on a very long fault. And if you're at the coastline, you should therefore evacuate to higher ground immediately. Lastly, note how the width of the rupture zone is about 200 kilometers. The area uplifted by the earthquake therefore measures about 1500 by 200 kilometers. With average seafloor uplift of around 2 to 3 meters, the volume of the water column displaced was several hundred cubic kilometers. That area of seafloor uplift is what is marked in red at the start of this tsunami simulation video, which we also watched in the last lecture. As I play the simulation again, warm colors will indicate tsunami wave crests, while cool colors will show tsunami wave troughs. Try to record the timing of the tsunami wave arrival, and whether it arrives first as a peak or a trough, at three locations. Banda Aceh, a city at the northern tip of Sumatra. Phuket, a popular tourist destination in Thailand, situated on the eastern shoreline of the Andaman Sea. And the island nation of Sri Lanka. You'll see that Banda Aceh is impacted by tsunami waves almost immediately, with the largest wave crest arriving just 20 to 30 minutes after the earthquake. There does not appear to have been any water drawback prior to the initial wave crest, but of course people this close to the earthquake would have felt very strong shaking, which should have provided a clear warning of the potential of a large tsunami wave. Phuket and the neighboring Andaman Sea coastline experienced water drawback before the first wave crest arrived, roughly two hours after the earthquake. Phuket lies about 500 kilometers east of the Sunda Megathrust Fault, and at this distance people also experienced weak to light shaking from the earthquake. These warning signs likely reduced the death toll substantially in this region. Sri Lanka lies about 1200 kilometers west of the Sunda Megathrust Fault, but was impacted by the first positive wave crest at about the same time as Phuket, roughly two hours after the earthquake. This is because the waves travel faster over the deep water of the Indian Ocean than over the shallower water of the Andaman Sea, which tectonically speaking is a continental shelf. However, Sri Lanka and neighboring parts of southern India received none of the warning signs of the incoming tsunami wave that Phuket experienced. The first tsunami wave to arrive in Sri Lanka was a crest, not a trough, and so there was no water drawback. Sri Lanka was also too far from the Sunda Megathrust to have experienced any perceptible shaking from the earthquake. Next we'll look at how people were impacted in these regions. Banda Aceh felt very strong shaking in the earthquake, with modified Makali intensities of around 7. The city lies on a wide coastal plain, and so it would have been impossible for all residents to evacuate in the roughly 20 minutes between the earthquake and the largest tsunami wave crest. This photo shows the maximum extent of inundation about 4km inland from the normal coastline. Tsunami wave flow heights within the city could be estimated from surveying the damage. For example, the paint stripped off the side of this house shows that the tsunami was likely 2-3m deep here. In fact, flow heights of 5m were common across much of the city. Tragically, over 100,000 people died in Banda Aceh alone, and around 167,000 in the Aceh province, nearly three quarters of the total for this event. The following video shows some of the best footage of the highest wave crest at Phuket in Thailand. The first frame of the video shows the telltale signs of seawater drawback, which preceded the first positive wave crest in this region. Despite this warning sign, over 8,000 people drowned in Thailand, including around 2,000 foreign tourists on Christmas vacations, along with around 500 in Myanmar to the north, and nearly 100 in Malaysia to the south. The video is just under a minute long. It's coming in. It's coming again! It's 15-20 feet tall. Easy! The following video shows some of the best footage of the tsunami wave crest in southern India. Like in neighbouring Sri Lanka, there was no preceding water drawback, nor could residents here feel any shaking in the earthquake. In total, about 35,000 people were killed in Sri Lanka, and about 16,000 died in India, the second and third highest national totals after Indonesia. This video is about two minutes long. It's 15-20 feet tall. Easy! It's 15-20 feet tall. Easy! After Indonesia, Sri Lanka, India, Thailand and Myanmar, the next worst impacted country was Somalia, in East Africa, where nearly 300 people are believed to have been killed. Maximum run-up heights of nine metres were recorded here. This map of estimated tsunami wave travel times shows that the Somalian coast was impacted a whole seven to eight hours after the earthquake occurred. This begs the question, why weren't the residents of countries like Sri Lanka, India, Thailand, Myanmar and Somalia notified of the incoming tsunami waves, given two hours or more of potential warning time? A combined 60,000 people died in these countries. We learned in the previous lecture about the DART tsunami alert system in the Pacific Ocean. Tragically, there was no such system installed at the time in the Indian Ocean, though efforts are now underway to build one. The magnitude 9.0 earthquake that generated the 11th of March 2011 Tohoku tsunami was the fourth or fifth largest on record. This earthquake was one of our two main case studies back in the earthquakes module. Recall that the earthquake ruptured the southern Japan trench, where the Pacific plate subducts westwards under the Japan volcanic arc. This is actually one of three subduction zones that lies just offshore eastern Japan. The country, therefore, has a very long recorded history of large subduction earthquakes and triggered tsunami waves, and in 2011 was probably the best prepared country in the whole world for tsunami hazards. There were earthquake and tsunami early warning systems in place, and the Japanese people were already amongst the best educated in the world at responding to these hazards. This shows the rupture area of the 2011 earthquake. Moreover, many towns and cities along the east coast of Japan had constructed large sea walls to defend themselves from tsunami waves. This incredible video shows an example, the 10 meter high tsunami wall in the small fishing village of Ryoishi. This village lies about halfway between Miyako and Kasanuma, two of the worst impacted towns for which videos were shown in the last lecture. Unfortunately, when sea walls like this one were built, it was not anticipated that tsunami crest heights could exceed 10 meters. Overtopping of sea walls like this one led to many thousands of deaths. The final toll was about 18,000. However, the death toll would have been much, much higher if it were not for the early warnings that were issued. In much of the footage of this event, you will hear the sounds of sirens in the background. Note also how the sea wall, though eventually breached, delayed the inundation by several minutes, probably allowing many more people to evacuate in time. Sadly, a large proportion of victims were elderly people who simply struggled to evacuate in time. Around two thirds of those killed were over 60 years old. Breaking news about bad weather. Mother Nature Angry Caught on Camera top 5 and top 10. Storm Chikungunya is causing havoc in Japan. Moment of truth The Tohoku disaster continues to impact Japan even a decade after the earthquake and tsunami. One of the longest lasting impacts has been from the flooding of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in Okuma, about 100 kilometres south of Sendai. This led to the most severe nuclear accident in the world since the Chernobyl disaster of 1986. The nuclear power plant had been protected by a six metre high breakwater, and the ground level of the facility was 10 metres above sea level. However, the local run-up was an estimated 14 to 15 metres above mean sea level. Recall from the earthquakes module why an earthquake and tsunami this size had not been anticipated in Japan. The shallow megathrust turned out not to be as seismic as previously thought, but rather conditionally stable, meaning that although it normally creeps, it can also be involved in the very largest of earthquakes. This allowed the 2011 Tohoku earthquake to rupture all the way to the seafloor at the trench. This generated an unprecedented amount of slip at the seafloor, possibly as much as 60 metres, the largest ever observed in an earthquake, and in turn an unusually large tsunami wave. However, also recall that, retrospectively, Japan could and perhaps should have anticipated an earthquake and tsunami of the dimensions of this 2011 event. The Sendai Plain was the area of furthest inundation in the 2011 tsunami, up to five kilometres inland from the normal coastline. This plain formed by meandering rivers and streams depositing layer upon layer of mud over tens or hundreds of thousands of years. Large tsunamis bring with them marine debris, sand, shells and wood, that would not normally be deposited on a river plain. By looking closely below the surface at layer upon sedimentary layer, we can therefore search for evidence of previous tsunami deposits. This photo shows a section through the uppermost one and a half metres of the coastal plain deposits, excavated after the 2011 tsunami. The Tohoku tsunami deposit can be seen as the grey layer at the surface, but below it, darker brown layers are normal muds, soils and peats, and the white layer is ash fallout from a major volcanic eruption in 915 CE. A thick layer of tsunami deposits underlies the ash layer and is associated with a major tsunami called the Jōgen tsunami that occurred in 869 CE. The existence of this tsunami was known from historical accounts, but there was little evidence as to how large it was until this study. The sedimentary evidence from the Sendai Plain suggests that it was as large as the one caused by the 2011 Tohoku earthquake. A third, thinner sand layer may be associated with the 1611 Keicho tsunami, another event known from historical accounts. Therefore, there is evidence from the sedimentary layers that earthquakes with similar characteristics to the 2011 Tohoku earthquake, and large enough to have flooded the Sendai coastal plain, might occur on average about every 500 to 1,000 years. Is there any comparable evidence for megathrust earthquakes and tsunamis here in Cascadia? We've seen this schematic cross-section before, showing the three main types of earthquakes that can occur in the Cascadia subduction zone. However, we don't have any instrumental record of large earthquakes on the Cascadian megathrust. This instrumental record goes back around a century. In the late 1980s, evidence started to emerge which indicated that great earthquakes and tsunamis have struck Cascadia, but before the instrumental record. One of the key pieces of evidence was the discovery and careful study of ghost forests in Oregon and Washington states. Ghost forests comprised trees that were killed as they were lowered into the saltwater tidal zone by coastal subsidence in a great megathrust earthquake. Radiocarbon dating and tree ring studies indicated that the forests were killed in about 1700 CE. The following video explains more. Ghost forests along the coast are part of the evidence that tsunami-generating earthquakes have occurred in the Pacific Northwest. In this simplified model, the continental plate is locked to the diving oceanic plate along a vast sloping fault. Stress and release cycles of deformation followed by great earthquakes occur every few hundred to a thousand years. As the leading edge of the overlying plate is pushed back, the land deforms and rises releasing energy along the way as smaller earthquakes in the brittle plates. When the stress between the plates becomes too great, friction will be overcome in a process called elastic rebound during which the overlying plate will pop out in a great earthquake, dropping coastal forests below sea level. If the seafloor pops upward, it will send tsunami waves in all directions away from the fault, carrying sand and debris deep inland. The drowned forest dies in a salty marsh. The process begins anew and the dead tree trunks are raised above sea level, creating what is known as a ghost forest. Let's look at a close-up view. The forest, represented by this single tree, grows in a fertile soil upslope of the shoreline. During rebound, the land level drops below sea level. The tsunami carries sand and debris inland. Over time, the tree roots die in the salty marsh and the mud accumulates. The land gradually rises again. How do we know this? First, Native American oral history, art, and ceremonies tell of Cascadia earthquakes and great waves tearing up trees and sweeping away villages in the night. The accounts place a great earthquake in the early 1700s. Geologists digging in coastal cutbanks noticed evidence for tsunami sands far from the shore. In this cutaway, we see an example of classic three-layer cake geology. The lower layer reveals an organic-rich topsoil with plants and charcoal from Native American fire pits that are buried by multiple layers of tsunami sands. These are used to determine the age of burial, plus or minus 20 years, using a carbon-14 dating method. Pale gray, fine-layered, sandy tsunami deposits leave a story of onrushing waves. The tsunami deposits are overlaying by intertidal mud and clays. Scientists looked at the tree ring history of drowned trees compared to ancient trees of known age to determine when the trees died. Initially, they narrowed the time of death to between 1695 and 1720. Ultimately, by dating the final ring from bark-covered roots, they discovered that the last tree ring recorded the 1699 growing season, so the trees died between the fall of 1699 and the spring of 1700. The final piece of the puzzle came from Japan, over 4,000 miles away. Abundant written records tell of a tsunami that flooded coastal areas from north to south on January 26th, 1700. They called it an orphan tsunami as it arrived without apparent earthquake. Calculating travel times down the coast of Japan places the origin in the Pacific Northwest at around 9 p.m. on January 26th, 1700. This computer simulation shows a state-of-the-art model of the tsunami waves triggered by the 1700 earthquake. The model takes the best available information about the slip magnitude and spatial extents of the 1700 earthquake from studies like the one described in the previous slide and uses this as an input to the simulation. As I repeat the simulation, note how the Pacific seafloor bathymetry and the illusion arc refract and channel wave energy towards Japan.