In this second lecture video, we'll introduce the various categories of landslide that you'll need to know about and describe their different characteristics. We'll practice landslide classification in the forthcoming activity class. Most landslides can be classified according to two things. Firstly, what type of material is being moved? On this schematic, the material is either rock, mud or debris, which refers to a mixture of broken up rock, soil and vegetation. However, landslides comprised of earth and soil are also common. Secondly, what is the type of movement? The main ways that these materials can move are by falling, sliding or flowing. Falls involve material falling through the air. Slides involve material sliding downhill. And flows occur when a mass of solid particles becomes fluidized, that is, behaves like a fluid. The main basic types of landslide are simply combinations of these terms. We have debris flows and mud flows, rock slides, debris slides and mud slides and rock falls and debris falls. Note that solid rock cannot flow without first being broken up into debris and mud doesn't really ever fall. So you rarely hear of rock flows or mud falls. However, further classifications are possible based on other characteristics, one of which is the speed of the movement. Landsliding can proceed at a wide range of velocities. At one end of the scale, the term creep describes the movement at speeds that would be imperceptible to the naked eye. Note that creep in this context is analogous to but distinct from the slow, steady fault creep that occurs on some tectonic faults discussed in an earlier lecture within the earthquakes module. At the other end of the scale, rock falls can travel at speeds of several meters per second. Some types of landslide, like debris slides and mud flows, are sometimes slow and sometimes rapid. Landslides can also be classified according to their water content. Water saturation is an important factor in how the mass movement behaves. However, as with landslide velocity, a range of water saturation states may be possible for a given class of landslide. For example, some debris flows are water saturated, while others are completely dry. Rock falls involve the free fall of a block of rock from a cliff face following the opening of a fracture. They are especially common hazard along coastlines, where wave action continuously undermines the base of a cliff. This spectacular rock fall at Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore in Lake Superior in August 2019 nearly took out a group of kayakers. In rock slides, rock slips downslope along a basal failure surface, shown here in red, that is somewhat analogous to the slip plane of a tectonic fault. The basal failure surface is often curved, concave upwards, such that the material rotates as it slides. These so-called rotational landslides produce distinctive landforms, including a headscarp at the top of the landslide, back-tilted blocks separated by transverse scarps and cracks within the body of the landslide, and a toe-scarp at the bottom of the landslide. This photograph gives a real example that mimics the schematic very closely. Note that this hill slope may have been undermined by the construction of a road or railway. This major landslide in Peru, which destroyed over 100 houses, displays many of the same features, but overall has a more complicated form. One can infer that the basal failure surface has a more complex shape than the simple concave upward form of the previous schematic. Nevertheless, the blocks within the landslide are clearly back-tilted, so this would still be classified as a rotational rock slide. Here's some beautiful drone footage of the landslide. Here's some drone footage of the landslide. Here's some drone footage of the landslide. Here's some drone footage of the landslide. Here's some drone footage of the landslide. Here's some drone footage of the landslide. A schematic cross-section through a rotational rock slide shows how the landslide material can be divided into a driving mass, where the basal failure surface points downslope, and a resisting mass, where the basal failure surface points upslope. Any rotational motion along the basal failure surface acts to reduce the driving mass and increase the resisting mass. Once these two masses are balanced, there is no longer a driving force for further sliding. Because of this, rotational rock slides tend to only move short distances, usually but not always at a relatively slow speed. Translational rock slides involve a planar basal failure surface, and so lack the resisting mass of the rotational rock slide. As a result, material usually travels faster and further than in rotational rock slides. In the schematic here, the failure surface follows a bedding plane, but it doesn't have to. When the material remains intact, as in the schematic, these landslides are also known as block slides. This photograph shows a real example of a classic block slide. In this video, we see an extraordinary example of a translational rock slide at Alta, Norway, in June 2020. Initially, the land around the houses simply translates downslope, though it later breaks apart as it enters the ocean. You would therefore be correct in classifying this as a translational landslide. However, the most distinctive attribute of this landslide is the very gentle sliding angle, which makes this an example of a lateral spread landslide. The raft of rock is sliding over a layer of liquefied clay, though exactly what triggered the sudden liquefaction is unknown. The landslide we saw earlier at Saint Jude in Quebec probably behaved in a similar way, though there is no video documentation of it. If the material fragments as it slides and mixes with soil and vegetation, it becomes a debris slide. This example was triggered by the 2018 magnitude 6.6 Tomokomai earthquake in northern Japan. Here's another classic debris slide from Sweden. This video of a debris slide in the Philippines was taken from a bus. There are a few things to note. Firstly, many smaller rocks tumble down the slope prior to the main failure. This is common in debris slides. Secondly, the weather conditions are dry. This is not a rainfall-triggered event. Thirdly, it is very difficult to judge the track of the landslide from the road. The man standing on the barrier was very lucky to escape. The lesson here is to keep well away. The final point is that the impact of the landslide was devastating. The bus driver did very well to stop short. It is not unusual for people to be killed as drivers try to pick their way through the debris on the road left by precursory events. The final major type of landslide movement is the flow. In flows, a mass of solid materials behaves as a viscous fluid, exhibiting turbulence. Types include earth flows, made of soil, debris flows, made of fragmented rock, soil and vegetation, mud flows, made of wet mud, and lahars, which are made of wet volcanic ash. This video shows a spectacular example from Switzerland. As the video plays, note how although the mass of the landslide behaves as a fluid, the landslide particles are still solid. They appear to be a rather dry mud. There are some other important attributes of flows which distinguish them from falls and slides. Because the landslide behaves as if fluidized, it will quickly become channelized along streams and riverbeds. For the same reason, flows can travel much greater distances than falls and slides. These debris flows at Kedarnath in the Indian Himalaya in 2013 provide a clear visual example of this. They originated high up on hill slopes, triggered by monsoon rains, but quickly concentrated in valleys. Unfortunately, villagers situated in these valleys were completely overwhelmed, and nearly 6,000 people were killed. Not all flows are catastrophic or potentially deadly. This dramatic video shows an example of an earth flow in Tibet. The landslide appears to be made up of organic-rich soil, or perhaps peat. The velocity is only about 1 m per second, which is actually relatively fast for this type of landslide. Many earth flows move at rates of meters per year. The velocity is controlled by the viscosity of the soil material and the local slope angle. More typically, soil on hillslope moves downhill through another type of landslide called soil creep. This is one of the slowest, but also one of the most common types of landslide. It is caused by cyclic expansion and contraction of soil particles. Expansion acts in the direction perpendicular to the hillslope, whereas contraction under gravity is vertical. This results in a slow, downward creep. The expansion and contraction can have a number of causes, including daytime warming and nighttime cooling, freezing and thawing, and wetting and drying of clay minerals. The classifications described previously account for most simple landslides. However, many landslides are more complicated, starting off as one type of movement and then evolving into another. We call these composite landslides. This example in New Zealand in April 2017 was triggered by the tropical cyclone Debbie. It starts off as a small rotational rock slide, but the rock quickly disintegrates into a debris slide, which then fluidizes into a debris flow. We'll watch this video again in slow motion and see again how the landslide changes type as it evolves. Here's the rotational rock slide. The rock disintegrates into debris and forms a debris slide. And then it completely fluidizes and becomes channelized into a debris flow. Rock falls often morph into debris slides when they hit slopes below and the intact rock disintegrates. This type of composite landslide is so common in mountainous regions that it has its own name, a rock avalanche. Many of the scree slopes you will encounter on steep mountains are formed in this way. This video shows a large rock avalanche at Pis Sengalo in the Swiss Alps in 2016. The rock fall on steep upper slopes fed a debris slide on the scree slopes below. The transition in landslide type is partially obscured by the turbulent clouds of dust. This dramatic footage shows an event on the same mountain in August 2017, captured by climbers from above. Oh boy, that's big! Tragically, just two days after this landslide, an even larger rock avalanche on Pis Sengalo morphed into a debris flow that killed eight people in the village of Bondo, six and a half kilometers from the landslide source. In this instance, the initial rock fall impacted a glacier, and so the roughly 3 million cubic meters of rocky debris was quickly entrained in about 600,000 cubic meters of ice and meltwater, which made it highly fluidized. The deep debris flow overwhelmed Bondo just two minutes after the initial rock fall. A sterstrom, from the German for full stream, is a type of rock avalanche that travels a particularly long horizontal distance compared to the total vertical drop. The ratio of the two can be as much as 20 to 30. This photo shows the Black Hawk slide in the San Bernardino Mountains of California, a giant prehistoric landslide dated at around 7,000 years. The distal edge of the lobe is approximately 9 kilometers to the north of, but only 1,200 meters below, the inferred original summit, giving a horizontal to vertical ratio of about 8 in this instance. There is still some debate about how such long runouts are possible. One theory, known as acoustic fluidization, hypothesizes that energetic vibrations and collisions of the rock fragments greatly reduces the internal friction of the landslide mass. Another theory invokes pressurized air pockets at the base of the slide, which provide a cushion that the landslide rides over, greatly reducing friction with the underlying ground surface. However, the merit of this theory has been called into question by the presence of sterstroms in vacuums such as on our Moon and on Phobos, a moon of Mars. This completes the first lecture on landslides.