The landslides module is divided into two lectures. The first introduces the topic and the second presents some detailed landslide case studies. In the first video of this lecture, we will go over the theoretical basics of why and how landslides happen, discussing the physics of slope stability conditions, the roles of water and geology, and the difference between preconditions and triggers of landslides. In the second video, we'll then discuss different categories of landslides. Mass movements are defined as the downslope movement of solid materials under the influence of gravity. They include pyroplastic flows and lahars, which we have already studied in the previous module. They also include snow avalanches, which we will not cover in this course. We call mass movements landslides when the material is rock, soil, mud, or debris, meaning a mixture of rock, soil, and vegetation. There are many different types of landslides, which we will come to in the second video of this lecture. However, what is common to all landslides is the action of gravity on slopes. Gravity is a force pointing towards Earth's centre of mass. Acting on a slope, this force can be split into a component parallel to the slope and a component acting perpendicular to the slope. These components make up a right-angled triangle with the overall gravity force along the hypotenuse. The component parallel to slope acts to pull material downslope and is resisted by friction between the material and the underlying rock mass. Under normal stable circumstances, friction wins this battle and the material on the slope stays in place. To get the material to move downslope in a landslide, we can do a number of things. Firstly, we can increase the angle of the slope. This simple adjustment increases the force component parallel to the slope at the expense of the force component perpendicular to the slope. The former overcomes frictional resistance and the material moves downslope in a landslide. Slope angles in mountainous regions are usually increased very gradually over long periods of time as rivers at the base of the slope erode into the underlying bedrock and in plate boundary settings as mountains are uplifted relative to surrounding sedimentary basins through faulting and tectonics. In fact, in some of the most tectonically active mountain belts, an equilibrium between uplift and erosion is reached in which hill slopes are kept steepened right to the point of failure and any small perturbation to this equilibrium will lead to landsliding. However, slope angles can sometimes be increased more abruptly, for example where a road cut is excavated into a steep hillside to make room for a road. A second way to increase the force parallel to the slope is to add to the mass of material on the slope. The simplest way to do this is to saturate the material with water. This is easiest with sedimentary rocks and soils which contain small gaps between particles called pore spaces. Replace the air that normally occupies pore spaces with water and the overall density and weight of the material will greatly increase and the material will move downslope. We will see during the course of this module that the saturation of slopes with rainwater is a very common contributing factor in landsliding. Another way to reduce the stability of material on the slope is by shaking it, especially during a nearby earthquake. The strong ground accelerations that accompany passing surface waves cause the component of force parallel to slope to fluctuate. If this force component overcomes frictional resistance, even momentarily, then a landslide will be triggered. The final way to reduce the stability of material on a slope is to reduce friction itself. This can occur by directly reducing the friction between the material and the slip plane as depicted here. Wetting or icing the slip plane will do this. Alternatively, material on slope can be made unstable by reducing its internal friction, which is the force resisting motion between the elements making up the solid material. In other words, internal friction is what gives material its cohesive strength. We'll look at some of the ways in which internal friction can be reduced a little later in this video. In reality, slope failures are usually the result of more than one of these factors. The following video provides a good example. It's taken from Everett in northwestern Washington State along the railway between Vancouver and Seattle. As you watch the landslide take out the train, think about which factors were at play. In my interpretation, all four of the factors discussed previously probably contributed. Firstly, the slope angle increased when the railway was built. Secondly, the water on the ground indicates that it had recently rained, which would have added to the mass of the soil and sediments that slid. Rainwater would also have reduced friction on the slope, though this might have been a minor factor. And lastly, vibrations from the passing train were probably important. It seems unlikely that the landslide would occur just as the train passes, purely as a coincidence. Furthermore, the multitude of factors normally involved in any landslide can be split into so-called preconditions and triggers. Preconditions are the things that, over relatively long periods of time, bring the slope close to the point of failure. In this example, I would classify the excavation of the slope above the railway line as a precondition, since it was excavated a long time before the landslide occurred. Triggers, on the other hand, are the events that push the slope over the edge. Here, there are probably two triggers. Firstly, the recent heavy rainfall event, and secondly, the vibrations caused by the passing train. I'd like you to think about preconditions and triggers whenever you consider the causes of a particular landslide. We'll discuss a few other examples now. The photograph here shows landsliding that followed the 2008 magnitude 7.9 Wenchuan earthquake in China's western Sichuan province. An incredible 20,000 individual landslides were mapped in this event. The main precondition for these landslides was the drastically steepened hill slopes, shaped over long periods of time by river incision at the foot of the slope and by tectonic uplift. The trigger for these landslides was the strong ground shaking induced by the large earthquake. This is an example of a hazard cascade, when one primary event, in this case the earthquake, triggers a chain reaction of secondary hazards, the landslides. An estimated 87,000 people died in the Wenchuan earthquake. It is thought that around 20,000 fatalities, close to a quarter of the total, died by triggered landslides. This photo shows several large apartment buildings destroyed by massive debris flows, a common type of landslide that we'll discuss in the second part of the lecture. The sheer volume of material dislodged by shaking in this earthquake, also evident in this photograph, means that landslide hazards continue to be elevated in this area even more than two decades later. For example, a heavy rainfall event could easily remobilize some of the eroded material, triggering a new set of debris slides. Hurricanes are another common trigger for landslides. This satellite image shows Hurricane Mitch, just before it made landfall over Honduras and Nicaragua in late October 1998. Shortly after this photo was taken, the hurricane stalled over Honduras for three days, generating up to 900 millimeters of rainfall during this short period of time. The intense rainfall triggered an incredible half a million individual landslides, mainly in the form of debris flows like the one shown here. Flooding and landsliding resulted in around 11,000 fatalities, making this the second deadliest Atlantic hurricane in history. The impacts were especially pronounced in Honduras, where around 7,000 people were killed and about 1.5 million people, 20% of the country's population, were displaced. Landslides and flooding destroyed over 100 hospitals and medical centers and about a quarter of the country's schools. About 70% of Honduras' road network was impacted, and flooding and contamination of aqueducts was so severe that about 70% of the population was left without access to fresh water, and 70% of the country's crops were also destroyed. The El Barinche landslide was the largest triggered by Hurricane Mitch, involving a volume of around 6 million cubic meters of rock. It's an example of a type of slow-moving landslide called a rotational rock slide. Unfortunately, it occurred within the heart of Honduras' capital city of Tegucigalpa, where this single landslide was responsible for its own cascade of secondary hazards. The landslide was sufficiently slow-moving that the neighborhood of Colonio Soto could be evacuated in time, and so nobody was killed directly by the landslide. However, the entire neighborhood was destroyed, leaving thousands homeless. The landslide also dammed the Rio Choluteca River, creating a lagoon behind the landslide dam, labeled L in this photograph. This lagoon submerged buildings in low-lying areas upstream, This lagoon submerged buildings in low-lying areas upstream, in up to 10 meters of water. Furthermore, since it was common for raw, untreated sewage to be emptied into the Rio Choluteca, the lake posed a long-lasting health hazard for the city. Heavy rainfall was also the trigger for the deadliest set of landslides in the past 100 years, in Vargas State, in coastal Venezuela, in December 1999. One year's worth of rainfall fell in just three days, triggering the failure of steep mountainous slopes. Preconditions that brought the slopes to the point of failure included long-term tectonic uplift, as well as relatively weak metamorphic bedrock. These landslides fed huge debris flows in the valleys below. The power of these flows is revealed by the huge size of some of the boulders that were transported downstream. Most of the towns in Vargas State are constructed on alluvial fans, conical-shaped mounds of sediment deposited at the mouths of rivers as they exit a mountain range. The sediment is deposited here because the abrupt decrease in channel slope means that rivers no longer have sufficient power to transport material. Unfortunately, this same decrease in slope makes alluvial fans an attractive place to build towns and villages. The 1999 debris flows overwhelmed the riverbanks of the alluvial fans, spilling out into residential neighbourhoods and destroying buildings. An estimated 30,000 people were killed, a whole tenth of the state's population, though only around 1,000 bodies were recovered. After the disaster, scientists at the U.S. Geological Survey studied older deposits within these alluvial fans and found that the entire fans are built from repeated debris flow events. This highlights another example of the sometimes fatal attraction between humans and hazards. In fact, some older debris flows were even thicker than those in December 1999 and transported and deposited even larger boulders. The 1999 disaster could have been even worse. Here we'll consider the preconditions and trigger of a much smaller landslide which occurred at Pay El in southwestern Washington state in December 2007. It's not a remarkable landslide in any way, but serves as one typical of those that occur in the Pacific Northwest. The trigger for this landslide was heavy rainfall during what became known as the Great Coastal Storm of 2007. The heavy rainfall is evident in the photograph from the visible swelling and brown muddy colour of the Chehalis River. Preconditions for this landslide included the surface geology of the area, which includes thick glacial till deposits. We'll look at the role of geology shortly. The slopes were also steepened by incision of the river. However, note also that certain human activities may also have been factors. Firstly, note the road along the foot of the hill slopes. This is Washington State Route 6. Construction of this road may have undercut the foot of the slope, removing a buttress of support to material above. Secondly, note the signs of intense logging activity on the hill slope that failed. This logging removed a protective layer of vegetation from the slope. Vegetation canopy prevents rain droplets from impacting the soil directly and helps the soil to soak up more of the water. Plants roots improve the soil's cohesive strength. So without the vegetation, rain droplets hit the soil directly. The soil quickly becomes waterlogged and more rainfall leads to surface water flow or runoff. This quickly erodes the soil feeding landslides. Logging activity is a particularly important consideration when discussing landslide hazards here in the Pacific Northwest. The loss of vegetation through wildfires is also important. We'll see examples of logging and wildfires as contributing factors in some of our case studies in the next lecture. The following video shows a spectacular landslide which was triggered by the 2018 Magnitude 7.5 Palu earthquake on the Indonesian island of Sulawesi. We looked at this earthquake briefly earlier on in the course and we'll come back to it during the tsunami module, but for the time being we'll see an example of a category of landslide called a lateral spread and we'll consider an interesting way in which humans may have contributed to its preconditions. As you watch the video, which is about two minutes long, look for the moving trees and buildings and consider what's unusual about the sense of movement. The rather unusual attribute to this particular landslide is the fact that the area impacted appears to be very flat and that the movement of the landslide is therefore mostly sideways rather than downhill. In fact this is why this type of landslide is called a lateral spread because most of the material motion is lateral. Next we'll watch another clip that explains what happened and why. Again the video is about two minutes long. Anthropogenic hazards are not like natural hazards. Because they are created by people, they can more easily be mitigated by people. So when we mapped the area of landsliding in the Pali Valley, we discovered that the areas that were affected by liquefaction-induced landsliding were restricted to areas that were heavily irrigated. We could see that there was a big aqueduct that had been built in the early 1900s, that that aqueduct was separating areas of zero damage from areas that were absolutely destroyed, and this gave us the clue that it was not just a natural hazard that had been activated. In irrigated areas there are buried sandy layers that are saturated with groundwater. When the earthquake happens, the strong ground shaking compresses the sediment and causes a big spike in water pressure below the ground, which effectively reduces the frictional stresses that normally hold the grains together. The sediment transforms into a fluid-like layer that can flow. This allows the ground above that liquefied layer to break up and slide downhill under the force of gravity. That's how liquefaction can lead to landsliding. The earthquake hazard in the Pali Valley is not going to go away, and so it's important for the reconstruction process there to look forward over the next hundred years and try to understand how to design an agricultural system that's sustainable in the face of seismic hazard and liquefaction hazards. By this point you'll have recognized how water plays an important role in many landslides. This photograph shows another spectacular example from Colbran, a small community in western Colorado. The landslide occurred on 25th of May 2014. Heavy rain and abrupt melting of the seasonal snowpack combined to saturate clay-rich sedimentary rocks at the edge of the Grand Mesa, an isolated, flat-topped mountain bounded on all sides by steep escarpments. You can see the Grand Mesa in the background of the photo. Unfortunately, the major mudslide was preceded earlier that day by a smaller landslide which had blocked an irrigation ditch. Three people sent to inspect the damage from the first landslide were killed and buried by the main mudslide. As described earlier, soil and sedimentary rocks contain pore spaces between the grains. The porosity is typically between 10% and 30% in sedimentary rocks and up to 50% in soils. If the air in pore space is replaced by water, in other words, the soil or rock becomes water saturated, its weight increases dramatically. In certain rare circumstances, a certain physical property of liquid water can also have an additional impact. Unlike air, liquid water is incompressible, so that if a rock is water saturated to significant depth, the pore water can become over-pressurized by the weight of material above it. This greatly reduces the internal friction and cohesive strength of the material. We'll see an example of this in one of our case studies next lecture. Another more unusual physical characteristic of water can also be important in landsliding. Water has the peculiar property that when it freezes, it expands. Most materials contract when they solidify from a liquid. This is why ice floats. Water in its expanded solid form is less dense than its more contracted liquid form. Rain or melt water that seeps into cracks in a rock surface can therefore force the crack apart when it freezes and expands. If this action is repeated over several melting and freezing cycles, the rock can completely disintegrate. This process is known as freeze-thaw weathering, or frost shattering. It is a very efficient way of reducing the strength of mountain slopes and generating loose material that is easily mobilized into a landslide. It is particularly efficient in climates where the temperature fluctuates around zero Celsius, such as in upland areas of Britain, shown in this photo. The grains of some sedimentary rocks are kept bound together by mineral precipitates called cement. Because of its chemistry, water can easily dissolve cement-forming minerals. Groundwater percolating through the rock dissolves the cement and carries it away, leaving a physical space in the rock and reducing its strength. Further groundwater flow can physically erode large underground spaces, forming caves. In turn, these caves can suddenly collapse in the type of landslide known as a sinkhole. This brings us to some of the important ways in which geology can promote landsliding. The chemical composition of the rock is crucial in whether sinkholes can form. Of the common rock-forming minerals, the ones that are most easily dissolved by water are calcite, a form of calcium carbonate, gypsum, which is calcium sulfate, and halite, or sodium chloride. Calcite is the main constituent Calcite is the main constituent of a suite of sedimentary rocks known as limestones, which form from the skeletal remains of marine organisms such as corals. Gypsum and halite belong to a suite of sedimentary rocks known as evaporites, which are deposited when seawater evaporates. This geological map shows parts of the United States that contain limestones, or other calcium carbonate-rich rocks, in green, and evaporitic rocks in blue. The red and yellow areas contain other rocks that are susceptible to the formation of extensive cave systems, which include certain volcanic rocks. These coloured regions are those prone to the formation of sinkholes. This sinkhole in Texas was caused by collapse of underlying evaporitic rocks, and may have been further exacerbated by the disposal of wastewater by companies drilling for oil in the area. Sinkholes are also a common hazard in Florida, where they are instead caused by the dissolution of limestone bedrock. Let's now look at another way in which geology can be a factor in landsliding, and one that's particularly important here in Canada. Clays are a very common class of silicate mineral with a distinctive platy structure, as seen on this electron microscope photograph of the clay mineral kaolinite. The framework of all clay minerals is made up of sheets of silica tetrahedra, with cations, such as potassium or magnesium, situated between the silica layers, holding them together. When water gets into rocks that contain clay minerals, it can strip away these cations. The increased separation and lubrication of the silica layers allows them to slide past each other more easily. This is why clay minerals and clay-bearing rocks become so slippery when they are wet. Clays are a by-product of the grinding action of glacial ice over bedrock. The material deposited by retreating glaciers, known as till, is therefore especially rich in clay. Tills are a very common surface rock in regions that were recently glaciated, including all of Canada. Until around 12,000 years ago, mountainous western Canada was covered by an ice sheet known as the Cordilleran ice sheet, while eastern Canada was covered by the Laurentide ice sheet. These ice sheets were up to two to four kilometres in thickness. Though the ice sheets are long gone, the impact on landsliding of the clay-rich sediments they left behind continues to this day. The St Lawrence and Ottawa river valleys, connecting Ottawa, Montreal and Quebec City, are especially prone to landsliding. This photo shows a lateral spread landslide that occurred in 2010 in Saint Jude, about 50 kilometres east of Montreal. This event occurred suddenly, without any warning, and a family of four was tragically killed when their home was buried. A temporary inlet of the Atlantic Ocean, called the Champlain Sea, occupied this region at the end of the Pleistocene epoch. Rivers transported large volumes of clay from the retreating Laurentide ice sheet and deposited it in this shallow sea. This clay deposit, in places up to around 200 feet thick, accounts for the prevalence of landsliding throughout this region of eastern Canada. Finally, we'll briefly consider the role of sedimentary bedding plains in landsliding. Bedding plains are the surfaces that separate each successive layer of a sedimentary rock from the preceding layer. Though they are deposited flat, they can later be tilted or folded by tectonic deformation. Bedding plains are relatively weak and can act as preferential sliding plains. This makes it important to consider the orientation of sedimentary rocks when evaluating slope stability. In this schematic, three buildings are constructed at different positions on the same sedimentary rock. The greenhouse is constructed where bedding plains are angled into the slope and thus sits in a stable position. The yellow windmill is built in a less favourable position because the bedding plains are parallel to the topographic slope, which is moderately steep. The red barn is situated in an even more unstable location, with a high risk of failure along bedding plains. This spectacular landslide in China, delimited by the dashed line, involved material sliding downslope along a bedding plain. And this video of a rock fall in India shows a clear bedding plain failure surface.