This lecture will focus on flooding hazards. The word flooding refers to any overflow or accumulation of water that submerges land that is normally dry. It occurs due to water escaping from water bodies, such as rivers, lakes and oceans, or from rainwater or meltwater accumulating on impermeable ground. We've already covered coastal flooding from storm surges and tsunamis in earlier lectures. Today we'll instead focus on flooding of inland areas. We'll start this first lecture video with a brief discussion of global flooding hazards. We'll then explore the various categories of flooding events. There are two broad classes of flooding. Hydro-meteorological floods are those related to the weather, while outburst floods are caused instead by the catastrophic failure of a natural dam. In the second part of the lecture we'll then explore two Canadian case studies. Worldwide, flooding affects more people than any other type of natural hazard. Nearly one third of Earth's land surface is believed to be affected or at risk of flooding. From 2000 to 2018, an estimated 2.23 million square kilometres of land has been inundated by major floods, affecting nearly 300 million people. What's worse, flood risks have increased globally and are set to continue to do so because of a combination of climate change-induced increases in the frequency and severity of floods and because populations and economic activity are increasing rapidly in flood-prone areas. Flooding accounts for many of the deadliest natural disasters on record. Over the past 100 years, fluvial flooding accounts fully for three of the world's worst natural disasters, including the deadliest of all, the 1931 Yangtze River floods in China. Coastal flooding accounts for two more on the list, the 1970 and 1991 cyclones in Bangladesh. In addition to placing people at risk from drowning, flooding can have long-lasting impacts. It can lead to damage or destruction of buildings, roads, bridges and sewer systems. It can contaminate water supplies, helping water-borne diseases to spread, and it can kill livestock and destroy crops, trees and other vegetation, potentially leading to famine. Hydrometeorological floods are those caused by the weather. They include coastal storm surges and meteor tsunamis caused primarily by strong winds, but these were covered in previous lectures. Today we'll look at the two more common types of hydrometeorological flooding, pluvial and fluvial. A pluvial or surface water flood is caused when heavy rainfall creates a flooding event independent of an overflowing water body. A fluvial or riverine flood is one in which a river bursts its banks. Infiltration and runoff are fundamental processes to both these types of flooding. Infiltration is the process by which water on the ground surface enters the soil to become groundwater. A given soil has an infiltration capacity or maximum rate of infiltration that depends upon soil characteristics, particularly the porosity, meaning the percentage of the soil volume made up by pore space, and its moisture content, whether the pore spaces are filled with air or saturated with water. Under moderate levels of precipitation, soils will normally remain undersaturated and most of the rainfall can infiltrate to become absorbed as groundwater. This is what is shown on the left. However, if the precipitation rate exceeds the infiltration rate, the excess water turns to surface runoff, also known as overland flow. This is what is shown on the right. Pluvial floods occur when the surface runoff collects in flat areas or low-lying depressions, independent of any river channels. They are often quite localized and are common in urban areas where much of the naturally absorbent soil has been replaced by asphalt or concrete. Pluvial floods occur when the surface runoff flows downslope to feed a drainage network of streams and river channels in quantities that cause them to burst their banks. The drainage network includes smaller tributaries feeding a larger trunk stream that transports the water to a drainage outlet. Each of these streams and rivers has a certain water carrying capacity, measured in units of cubic meters per second, that it can transport within the confines of the river channel. When the discharge exceeds the carrying capacity, water spills over the banks, leading to flooding. In lowland rivers, repeating flooding produces a flat floodplain perched above the river banks. Floodplains are effectively the beds of streams during floods. The floodwater that escapes the confines of the channel flows at a lower velocity than that in the main channel, and is no longer capable of keeping the same amount of fine sediment in suspension. The fine sediments thus settle out quickly on the parts of the floodplain nearest to the channel. Over a significant number of floods, this will eventually result in the build-up of ridges in these positions. These ridges are known as natural levees. These landforms help to increase the carrying capacity of lowland rivers. They are often complemented or reinforced by artificial levees, commonly known as dikes, which are used to keep the course of rivers from changing, and to protect against continued flooding of the natural floodplain. The construction of levees reflects that floodplains are very attractive places for humans. We are drawn to building, living, and working on floodplains for several reasons. Firstly, there is easy access to nearby fresh water. Secondly, there is fertile land for farming. Thirdly, there is cheap transportation via rivers and railroads which tend to exploit the low gradients of floodplains. And fourthly, there is the relative ease of developing and building on flat land. Floodplains can be classified or subdivided by the frequency at which they naturally flood, providing a useful guide for zoning and for appropriately designing buildings and infrastructure. Typically critical utilities like hospitals and evacuation centres should be placed where there is no flood risk. Homes should be placed where there is low flood risk. And agriculture, recreation, and open space can be placed where the flood risk is higher. A 100-year floodplain is defined as the area with 1% probability, that is 1 over 100 probability, of flooding in any given year. However, individual floods are uncorrelated, so this term does not mean that there is exactly one flood per century, or that there are 100 years between successive floods. In other words, if a 100-year floodplain floods this year, there is still a 1% probability of it flooding again next year. Flood return periods are usually estimated from historical events. However, one limitation is that the record may not be long. A second limitation is that the past record may no longer be an appropriate guide to the future because of accelerating climate change. Next, we'll look at some of the meteorological conditions that can lead to fluvial and pluvial floods. Here on the west coast of North America, atmospheric rivers are a common cause of fluvial and pluvial flooding. Sometimes termed rivers in the sky, they are relatively long, narrow bands of very moist air that help transport water vapour away from the tropics to higher latitudes. The atmospheric rivers affecting western North America are nicknamed the Pineapple Express since they often originate around Hawaii. Up to about 30 of these can form in a typical year. They can be over 1,500 kilometres long but are typically less than 500 kilometres wide and can carry an amount of water equivalent to several times the average discharge at the mouth of the Mississippi River. When the atmospheric rivers sweep over the coastal mountains in B.C. or western U.S., the air rises and cools and the water vapour condenses to form rain or snowfall. Many atmospheric rivers are weak systems that provide beneficial rain or snow. Indeed, an estimated 30-50% of annual precipitation on the west coast comes in this form. However, the most intense atmospheric rivers can dump a month's worth of rain or snow in a matter of a few days. This can cause intense flooding as well as landsliding, as we will see in one of our flooding case studies. Flash floods are those which involve torrential rainfall over a shorter time period, typically a few hours or less, and often over a much smaller area. This shows an example from Boulder, Colorado, in September 2013. Boulder received an incredible 9 inches, or 230 millimetres, of rain on the day of this flood. This two-minute-long video shows some of the footage of the event. ...crisis in Colorado. The floodwaters there are out of control. You can see there is a man who is racing to open the floodgates. He puts his own life in danger to open them. Dramatic rescues have been unfolding there through the day and the night, and we will bring you the very latest. Such an urgent situation. Such an urgent situation. A lot of information coming in right now, Sam. You're watching a woman in the water in that video. She just can't keep her balance in that heavy water, and she's just trying to get out of the area. We're basically showing you all of these pictures from the Boulder area, but remember, we're talking about a very large area. Let's go to some new pictures that are coming out of Big Thompson Canyon. That's between Estes Park and Loveland, Colorado. There are parts of eight western states that are under flood watches and warnings this morning. In the Boulder, Estes, Loveland area, at least three highways are gone. I'm going to say it's four or five. We're talking about highways gone. You can see how the water is rushing so hard it undermines the road surfaces and then carves out below them. Overnight flash flooding in Boulder, Colorado. The sirens have just sounded again in Boulder. As growing floods have cut off almost every road to this city of nearly 100,000 people. A dam breach causing a sudden surge of water, mud, and debris to rip through this residential town. The owner of this home frantically signaling for help. Oh my gosh, oh my gosh. Wow, we felt that. This morning, hundreds of residents in the remote town of Lyons are trapped on the wrong side of a raging river. If the water comes over this bridge, this town is gone. It may be days before they're rescued. In the meantime, they're dealing with no sewage and no running water. This remarkable scene, a road completely wiped away. We have three cars in the water. Rescuers braving the rapids to frantically pull out a car. A man discovered inside. He'd been underwater for an hour. Half of all flash flood fatalities are from people trying to drive along or across flooded roads. Just 0.3 meters of water can move a vehicle laterally. Just 0.6 meters of water can float a car, allowing it to be rolled or swept away. Note that strong currents can wash the road bed out. And so water flows over roads are often deeper than you think. The following video shows a flash flood in Texas, 2015, sweeping away a car that tried to get through. If it keeps raining, it's going to get worse and it will push it away. Oh, my God. Stop. Stop. Stop. He needs to get out. Don't. Don't. Don't do it. Don't. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. The next video shows what to do if you do get stuck in this situation. The next video shows what to do if you do get stuck in this situation. Just reach down there. There it is. Yeah, we can. Yeah. Okay. Okay. We're going to get you sitting on the roof here. There you go. Yeah. Desert areas with dry, poorly absorbent soil and occasional torrential rain and especially prone to flash floods. Be careful when hiking and do not camp in the bottom of narrow canyons or on dry stream beds. The following video shows a spectacular flash flood in Johnson Canyon in Utah in July 2018. Oh wow! Wow! Big time flash flood here! Big time! Wow! Climbing up! Oh wow! Whoa! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Wow! Living trees slow down snow melting by providing the hillsides with more shade and soak up more of the meltwater. Rain on snow floods occur when heavy rain falls on snowpack, also typically in the spring. The water cannot infiltrate the ground and instead mixes with the snow to form surface runoff that can overwhelm downstream rivers and reservoirs. Heavy, water-saturated snow can also damage roofs and buildings and greatly increases avalanche hazards. This is another hazard that is expected to grow substantially as the planet warms. For example, it's estimated that flooding by rain falling on snowpack could more than double by the end of this century within the western US and Canada. Ice jams form when pieces of floating ice carried by a stream's current accumulate at an obstruction like a river bend, a tributary mouth, a point where the river slope decreases, or at man-made obstructions like bridges. This can result in a significant flooding hazard both upstream and downstream of the ice jam. Upstream, river water can back up, overtopping the channel's banks. Downstream areas are also at risk from the ice jam suddenly breaking and releasing a large volume of water. Ice jams are a major cause of flooding along Canadian rivers, both that freeze up in early winter and break up in late spring. This video shows a time lapse of an ice jam in New York. What's most remarkable is the speed at which the water level rises and at which flash flooding occurs. The next video shows a spectacular example of an ice jam in New Brunswick. This video shows a time lapse of an ice jam in New Brunswick. This video shows a time lapse of an ice jam in New Brunswick. This video shows a time lapse of an ice jam in New Brunswick. Finally, not all floods are hydrometeorological. For example, large landslide deposits can block rivers, causing flooding upstream. Atabad Lake in northern Pakistan was formed due to a massive landslide in January 2010. The landslide itself killed 20 people, but it also blocked flow of the Hunza River for five months. The lake flooding upstream of the landslide has displaced 6,000 people from upstream villages and stranded a further 25,000 by flooding nearly 20 kilometres of the only access route into the area. However, the real concern now is downstream, since the dam is likely to eventually break catastrophically, leading to what is known as an outburst flood. Volcanic materials such as lava flows and pyroclastic deposits can also form natural dams that are at risk from sudden failure and outburst floods. There is a good local example at Garibaldi Lake, just north of Vancouver. Garibaldi Lake is supported by a lava flow known as the barrier. If this were to catastrophically fail, a torrent of water would flood the lake, and if this were to catastrophically fail, a torrent of water would escape downstream, threatening the town of Squamish. Glaciers can also form natural dams, resulting in pro-glacial lakes above ground and sub-glacial lakes underneath the ice. When these dams suddenly fail, the resulting outburst floods are called Jökullalps, an Icelandic term meaning glacial run. In Iceland, which is of course a glaciated volcanic region, Jökullalps are often triggered by sub-glacial volcanic eruptions, which suddenly melt the ice on top of the volcano. Volcanism beneath Vatnajökull in Iceland maintains a sub-glacial lake in the Grimsvötn caldera, which discharges every few years as a huge Jökullalp. An eruption in 1996 led to a particularly large example. 3.6 cubic kilometres of water and 1,000 tonnes of ice was discharged in just 20 hours. The peak flow rate was 55,000 cubic metres per second, 20 times the flow rate of the Niagara Falls, and 9 metres of sediment was deposited on the outwash plains shown here. 6 kilometres of Iceland's Ring Road highway was destroyed, including two concrete-steel bridges built specially to withstand Jökullalps. This completes the first lecture video.