In the second lecture video, we'll examine two Canadian case studies. Firstly, the 1950 flooding of the Red River in Manitoba. And secondly, the recent flooding of the lower Fraser River here in British Columbia. It's estimated that about 10% of Canadians live in flood prone areas, which includes significant parts of all of the largest metro areas, including Toronto, Vancouver, Calgary, Montreal and Edmonton. However, the most flood prone of all major Canadian cities is probably Winnipeg, Manitoba. Three individual flooding events in 1950, 1993 and 1997 feature in this 2005 table of the costliest Canadian natural disasters in history. Note that this table is already well out of date, largely due to newer flooding events. Our second case study, the 2021 Fraser River floods, is expected to be Canada's costliest disaster of all time, and would probably top an updated table. Major floods in Calgary and Toronto in 2013 would also feature high up an updated table. Winnipeg is especially flood prone as a result of its peculiar geography and its recent geologic history. It is situated along the Red River, which drains parts of North Dakota, Minnesota, Manitoba and Saskatchewan, northwards into Lake Winnipeg. From there, it drains into Hudson Bay as the Nelson River. The Red River crosses the former lake bed of Lake Agassiz, a vast proglacial lake that formed from melting at the southern edge of the Laurentide ice sheet around 10,000 years ago. There are several important consequences of this geography. Firstly, because the Red River occupies a lake bed, it has an unusually low gradient of just 10 centimetres per kilometre. Its young age means the river has not had time to carve a proper valley. Instead, it meanders over a broad floodplain. Secondly, the proglacial lake bed is made from glacial till, which is especially rich in clay. Clay, in turn, makes the soils of this region relatively impermeable, restricting infiltration and increasing runoff whenever there is an influx of rain or meltwater. Finally, the Red River basin has a strong seasonal continental climate, even by Canadian standards, with long, very cold winters turning rapidly to very warm summers. This makes the Red River especially prone to snowmelt and ice jam flooding. In 1950, abrupt melting of heavy winter snows in a late thaw, combined with heavy spring rains, led to major flooding of the Red River that lasted two months, from mid-April through mid-June. A total of 1,600 square kilometres of mostly agricultural land across southern Manitoba was covered up in up to two metres of floodwater, essentially forming an enormous lake. Dikes constructed to protect Winnipeg were breached, and the city was inundated on 5 May. This led to the largest evacuation in Canadian history. More than 100,000 people, one-third of the then population of Winnipeg, had to be evacuated. Around one-eighth of the city area and more than 10,000 individual buildings were flooded in up to five metres of floodwater, causing losses of well over $1 billion in today's money. At the time, this was Canada's costliest ever natural disaster. In response to the 1950 flood, a huge artificial waterway was constructed in the 1960s, with the purpose of diverting future floodwater safely around the edges of Winnipeg. At 140 metres wide, the Red River floodway was large enough to divert up to 1,700 cubic metres per second of water around the city. At the time of construction, this was estimated to be enough to cope with 200-year floods. At 48 kilometres long, the Red River floodway was the second largest earth-moving project in the world at that time, next only to the Panama Canal. Flow is controlled by an inlet control structure, where the Red River approaches the southern limits of the city of Winnipeg. Under low flow conditions, the water level in the Red River is below the floodway channel inlet lip, and all of the Red River flow passes as normal through Winnipeg, leaving the floodway itself completely dry. This is the situation for the great majority of the time. However, when the water level in the Red River rises just above the top of the floodway channel inlet lip, most of the Red River flow still passes through Winnipeg, but some begins to spill over into the floodway channel. If necessary, a flood control gate can be raised, resulting in more water spilling into the floodway channel and less flowing through Winnipeg. Normally, water levels upstream of the inlet are kept at or below the natural level that they would be without any flood control. Under the very worst flooding conditions, in order to protect Winnipeg, the control gates must be raised sufficiently that water levels upstream of the inlet are raised to above the natural level. This leads to artificial flooding to the south of the city. In these instances, the Manitoba government provides compensation to any individuals who experience damages. The floodway system cost taxpayers $63 million at the time, approximately half a billion in today's money, and was initially considered by many to be a complete waste of money. However, as it turned out, use of the floodway has been required much more frequently than even its supporters anticipated at the time. Diverting floodwater around Winnipeg on average every two to three years is estimated to have saved a cumulative $40 billion in damages, many, many times its original cost. The floodway is now recognized as a national historic civil engineering site and is considered one of the world's 16 engineering marvels. The floodway really came to the fore in 1997, when there was a particularly severe set of spring floods along the Red River, the worst in well over a century, including those of 1950. These were the result of a record two and a half meter winter snowpack, a spring blizzard which added a further 50 centimeters of snow, and finally a rapid thaw. A 50 kilometer by 100 kilometer lake formed in Manitoba, causing 60,000 people to be evacuated and drowning 120,000 cattle. The total costs were $1 billion. However, the floodway saved Winnipeg just with waters coming to within 60 centimeters of the top of the floodway. In fact, in response to the 1997 floods, the capacity of the floodway was doubled in the early 2000s at a cost of an additional $600 million. The new floodway is now designed to absorb an estimated 700 year flood. We'll now turn to the recent flooding of the lower Fraser Valley here in British Columbia. The Fraser River is the largest on Canada's west coast and its watershed, shown here in green, captures around a quarter of the surface area of BC. Though most of the catchment is mountainous, the lowermost roughly 80 kilometer long section of the Fraser River occupies a broad floodplain, colored here in a light shade of blue. Peak flood conditions typically occur in May or June, when they are a function of the basin snow pack and the springtime weather. Sudden large and sustained temperature increases and significant precipitation can result in high flows spilling out over the floodplain. There have been two major floods since European settlement in 1894 and 1948, both in springtime. Since the late 19th century, dikes have been installed throughout the lower mainland to help limit or prevent flooding and to allow for development of the floodplain for settlement and agriculture. Large towns have sprung up and grown and the floodplain now includes virtually all of Delta, Richmond, Pitt Meadows and Kent, and large parts of Surrey, Port Coquitlam, Abbotsford and Chilliwack. The soils in the Fraser Valley are some of the most fertile in Canada and the region has one of the longest frost free periods in the country, making the area highly favorable for agriculture. Farming on the floodplain accounts for a significant proportion of BC's food production, including most of its dairy and poultry. Upstream from the lower Fraser Valley floodplain, the Fraser River descends rapidly through the Fraser Canyon, a set of narrow rock gorges in the coast mountains. The Fraser Canyon is a major transportation corridor with the Canadian National and Canadian Pacific Railways and the Trans-Canada Highway 1 carved out of its rock faces. A road shortcut from Vancouver to the interior, known as the Coquihalla Highway, which is part of Highway 5, follows the courses of the Coquihalla and Coldwater Rivers, two major tributaries of the Fraser River. Southern BC was hit by an extremely intense atmospheric river on the 13th, 14th and 15th of November 2021. This map shows the cumulative rainfall totals across the region. According to Environment Canada, 20 areas broke daily records for precipitation. For example, in Hope, at the mouth of the Fraser Canyon, 174 millimetres of rain fell in a single day, five times the previous record. Abbotsford, on the lower Fraser River floodplain, received 100 millimetres, double the old record. Many locations exceeded their average rainfall levels for all of November in a span of just two days. The record rainfall led to major flooding and landsliding along the Fraser River and many of its tributaries. This was exacerbated by some additional factors. Firstly, the atmospheric river followed an already wet fall, so the ground was already water-saturated, reducing infiltration and increasing runoff. Secondly, the wet fall itself followed an exceptionally hot summer in which a so-called heat dome smashed several temperature records in the province, triggering huge wildfires that tore through much of the Fraser River Canyon. We'll look at these wildfires in more detail in the next class, but in the context of the flooding, the fire stripped away vegetation, destabilising hill slopes and adding a layer of water-repellent ash, reducing infiltration rates further. This map summarises some of the worst impacts of the November rainfall event. We'll look briefly at flooding of the Coldwater and Nicola Rivers at Merritt, the washouts of Highways 1 and 5 and the Fraser Canyon Railways, and finally flooding of Sumas Prairie near Abbotsford. On November 2015-2021, the entire city of Merritt, population 7,000, was ordered to evacuate after the Nicola and Coldwater Rivers spilled their banks and flooded the town's wastewater treatment plant, causing the town's sewage system to back up. Many homes were also flooded, as this video shows. This morning, Diana Boston waded through floodwaters to get her family and pets to safety. I was frozen already. I was on the verge of hyperventilating or whatever you call it, getting too cold and I couldn't barely even function. A large chunk of the city is underwater after the flood. The city of Merritt is the only city in the world to have a flood-affected area. A large chunk of the city is underwater after the nearby Coldwater River spilled its banks and poured onto properties. Inside, I'm tearing apart. On the outside, I have to stay strong. Like I said, I have my daughter and my pets and they can feel when they're getting sad or upset or agitated. The city's water treatment plant is flooded. That has forced the evacuation of the entire community, more than 7,000 people. Emergency officials are telling them to go to the cities of Kamloops and Kelowna. My heart goes out to people. I know we've had people come here to City Hall to ask if they can please go and collect a few things from their homes and we've had to tell them it is simply not safe. This is the school bus over here. Do you want to try and get onto it? Yeah, that'd be awesome. Yeah, okay. Alex Watson and his partner, Jessica DeWitt, watched as water streamed into their kitchen early this morning. Heartbreaking. It was heartbreaking. Because you can't do anything about it. Nope, nothing. At least with the fires, we kind of had a chance. You could come out with the hose. That was only three months ago, like. And to this extreme and our house is half gone. This one's Aries. This one is Sophia. They were able to get their five cats and some belongings out before water got too high in their home. They are among the thousands. Getting out of town is fast, but it's not easy. Among the thousands getting out of town as fast as they can, not knowing what will be left when they're allowed to return. Brady Strachan, CBC News, Merritt. In the Fraser Canyon and its tributaries, numerous highways and railways were washed out by floodwaters and further damaged by triggered debris flows and debris slides. It is estimated that roads have been destroyed or badly damaged in at least 200 separate places. Shown in this aerial video, Highway 8 along the Nicola River between Merritt and Spence bridges was the worst affected road, with four bridges and 18 segments of the highway covering a cumulative distance of five to six kilometres, either damaged or destroyed. In places, the river itself has completely changed course and now occupies where the road previously was. Along these stretches, Highway 8 will require an entirely new route to be designed and engineered. This will likely take several months. The Kokihala Highway was either washed out by floodwater or damaged by landslides in around 20 different places. Several bridges were completely taken out, like the one shown in this photograph. It is expected to reopen partially to commercial and freight traffic in January 2022. This schedule could be put back by a harsh winter. Recall that this is normally the fastest route between Vancouver and the interior of the province and indeed the rest of Canada. In the Fraser Canyon, Highway 1, the Trans-Canada Highway, was also destroyed in about seven different places. This is one of the worst affected roads in the province, with a total Note the incredibly lucky escape of the vehicle with the U-Haul trailer on the left of this large landslide. Like Highway 5, it is expected to reopen partially to commercial traffic only in January. With Highway 99 north of Vancouver also closed to larger vehicles due to landsliding, the only road link for traffic on the Trans-Canada Highway will be in January 2022. Due to landsliding, the only road link for transport trucks connecting Metro Vancouver to the interior right now is a slow and circuitous route through Highway 7 and then Highway 3. There are currently travel restrictions on the highway that only allow essential vehicles to drive on it. The closure of these critical transport routes led to fears about supply chains being compromised and caused panic buying throughout the province. Still in the Fraser Canyon, the CP and CN railways were also badly damaged. These railways are the primary route for moving the ore from mines in interior BC and Alberta to Vancouver from where they are shipped abroad. Fortunately, the railways were patched up quickly, only remaining completely closed for about one week. This limited the negative impacts on the extractive industries. The most extensive flooding occurred downstream from the Fraser River Canyon in the floodplains of the lower Fraser River. This photo shows flooding of Highway 1 near Abbotsford. In this area, nearly 20,000 people were forced to abandon their homes. This photo was taken from Abbotsford looking southeast over an agricultural plain known as Sumas Prairie. That's Colshan or Mount Baker, the Cascade Volcano, in the distance across the US border. Sumas Prairie is one of the most productive farming regions in the country, home to thousands of cattle and millions of chickens, and responsible for much of BC's milk, dairy and poultry supply. Sumas Prairie was particularly badly hit by flooding. An emergency evacuation was called for and given only very short notice, farmers were forced to leave behind most of their livestock. Tragically, untold numbers of abandoned animals drowned in the flooding. Sumas Prairie was impacted not only by floodwaters from the Fraser River, Sumas Prairie was impacted not only by floodwaters from the Fraser River, but also by those from the Nooksack River, which drains the northern slopes of Mount Baker and empties into the Salish Sea near Bellingham, Washington. Note that the course of the Nooksack is entirely within US territory. A few thousand years ago, or perhaps even as recently as a few hundred years ago, the Nooksack River followed a different lower course, flowing northwards rather than westwards from the location of the modern town of Everson. It is quite common for lowland rivers to change their courses in this way, a process known as channel avulsion. Often the change is triggered by a major flooding event. The old Nooksack River crossed what is now the Canadian border and flowed into Sumas Prairie, where it formed a large lake known as Sumas Lake. The bottom of the lake bed lay roughly at sea level and a few metres below the surface level of the nearby Fraser River. During periods of high discharge in the Nooksack River, water would fill the prairie to a level equal to the Fraser River, and the lake would empty northwards into the Fraser via the short Sumas River. However, at other times, the level of the Fraser River could be higher than Sumas Lake, and water from the Fraser would sometimes spill over and help fill the lake from the north. The lake supported a rich ecosystem that was the lifeblood to the Semaf people, who built villages around the lake as long ago as 400 BC. When European settlers arrived, they in too encountered Sumas Lake, though by that time the Nooksack River no longer flowed north, instead travelling west to the ocean near Bellingham. But the newcomers didn't like the lake. They hated the mosquitoes, didn't use the water, and were envious of the extremely fertile volcanic soil at its bottom. So, almost exactly 100 years ago, engineers drained the lake. Or rather, they pumped water out of the lake, as one must do when a lake bed is lower than all of the land surrounding it, as is shown in this modern LiDAR topographic map. The engineers created a series of drainage ditches, dredged what we now know as the Vedder Canal to reroute the Chilliwack River, and constructed a large pump station at Barrow Town to lift water up and into the Sumas River. That river joined with the Vedder shortly after the pump station, and from there the waters flowed north into the Fraser River. The original pump station was replaced by the current Barrow Town, The original pump station was replaced by the current Barrow Town pump station in the 1980s, at a cost of $27 million. Today's facility has four massive pumps to suck water out of the Sumas Prairie fields. The system was a boon for white settler farmers, but devastated local First Nations. However, the current situation of Sumas Prairie is very precarious. This zoomed out LiDAR elevation map shows how flooding of the Nooksack River near Everson would quickly fill the Sumas Basin with water. This is exactly what happened in November 2021. The situation was further exacerbated by floodwaters from the north from the overfull Fraser and Chilliwack Rivers. The following two-minute video has some further information and context about the flooding of Sumas Prairie in November 2021. From above, when you see what the water's newly done to the Sumas Prairie in BC, you're really looking back in time. A hundred years ago that plain was a lake, and when the rains came, sometimes that lake stretched to 80 square kilometres. Frustrating for farmers along its shorelines. So in the early 1920s, the lake was drained to create lucrative land that now sits below sea level. This is where most of the province's dairy and poultry now come from. The prospect of disaster always looming. Journalist Tyler Olson has been watching the water and a shifting climate for years. Water flows downhill and absent infrastructure like Barrowtown Pump Station or absent the water making its way to the Fraser, it will go to what used to be Sumas Lake. Add the decision to drain to a cork of nature and you have the core of the crisis. A name you hear spoken of with a lot of concern now, the Nooksack River. Curious, because look at the Nooksack, it doesn't travel anywhere near Canada. But when it floods, the water flows north between those mountain ranges, right into that low flat Sumas Prairie. The Barrowtown pumps, whose job it is to drain those waters, sit just to the north of it. That's why volunteers were frantically sandbagging those pumps overnight. The biggest in Western Canada, they have to be protected. The need for better protections long fought for and argued over. Bringing the dikes up to standard is expected to cost more than 400 million dollars and that's in Abbotsford alone. And Abbotsford is the largest municipality in DC, but it's by far not the only one along the Fraser River. And so it requires a lot of international cooperation. It also requires cooperation between municipalities and counties and it seems like that's where in the last decade, even when we didn't know this threat exists, that work didn't get done. In the absence of physical protections, all that's left to safeguard lives and livelihoods is a solid alert system. But in BC, it's a patchwork of systems. Different municipalities, different apps, different approaches. That wall of water was coming for BC. Advancing as early as late last week, unstoppable. The land weakened by wildfires, unable to hold it back. As the video suggests, catastrophic flooding of Sumas Prairie had been anticipated, but authorities had not, and still have not, yet worked out how to fund adequate mitigation measures. This is not the last time we will hear of this problem. Anthropogenic climate change is making events like this worse, both in terms of frequency and magnitude. As the climate warms, an increase in air moisture means that atmospheric rivers are projected to become more intense, larger, and carry higher volumes of water vapour. The warmer the air is, the more water vapour it can carry. As the atmosphere's average temperature rises then, an atmospheric river can grow. And when it makes landfall, it can release more rain or snow than in years past. According to this 2014 NRCan study, summarised in this map, BC will experience up to 40% more frequent major precipitation days, defined as those exceeding a 20-year return period, by the middle of this century than it did late last century. And according to a more recent 2018 study, we can expect atmospheric rivers that reach the BC coast to become up to 25% wider, 25% longer, and overall 50% more intense than previously. The resulting rainfall events will also become longer, potentially lasting four or five days, as opposed to the usual one or two. This completes the lecture on flooding hazards. Next time we'll look at our final natural hazard, and another one which is becoming much worse through anthropogenic climate change, wildfires.