In the second part of the lecture, we'll introduce the seismic intensity scale, which describes the strength of ground shaking caused by seismic waves. We'll then look at the various factors that control intensity. We'll see that there is far more to it than just the earthquake magnitude. We'll finish the lecture by considering some earthquake scenarios here in the Cascadia region. Where is the greatest shaking likely to occur in a future earthquake? And what type of earthquake would cause the strongest ground shaking in Cascadia? The intensity describes the severity of shaking caused by an earthquake at a given location. It relates to the effects caused by the earthquake, and unlike the magnitude, does not describe the actual earthquake itself. A single earthquake has one magnitude, but causes different intensities at different locations. Usually, these intensities are greatest closest to the earthquake epicenter and become smaller with increasing distance, a pattern called attenuation, but there are other factors in play, as we shall see later in the video. Intensities are formalized into the modified Mercalli intensity scale, shortened to MMI. An Italian priest, Guiseppe Mercalli, devised the original intensity scale in 1902, before it was modified into the current version in 1931. This was before seismometers became widespread, and before the first magnitude scale was devised, the Richter scale appearing in 1935. The modified Mercalli intensity scale is descriptive, with Roman numerals expressing perceived levels of shaking. You can read the descriptive terms here. For example, an MMI of 1, labeled instrumental, means that most people didn't even perceive any shaking, but it was picked up by instruments. An MMI of 3, or slight shaking, means that it was noticed by many people, but not necessarily recognized as an earthquake. At MMI 5, or rather strong, windows may break. At MMI 7, or very strong, it will be difficult to stand up, and there may be considerable damage to poorly constructed buildings. At MMI of 9, or violent, some buildings may collapse, and at MMI 11, or extreme, few structures will even remain standing. These intensities can be plotted on an iso-seismal map, with the iso-seismal contours connecting areas of equal strength of shaking. For older events that precede the development of seismograph instruments, we call these historic earthquakes, iso-seismal maps often provide our best means for estimating the earthquake location and its approximate magnitude. The map here shows ground shaking in the 1811 New Madrid earthquake in Missouri, a so-called intraplate earthquake, since it occurred in the middle of the North American plate. We'll look in a little more detail at this unusual class of earthquake in a subsequent lecture. Intensities for the New Madrid earthquake were estimated from newspaper reports and personal accounts, collectively known as felt reports. For example, a newspaper in Georgetown, South Carolina, published this article describing the effects of the earthquake. It reports that most people were awakened, a few were unable to stand up, and that windows clattered and houses cracked. It does not, however, appear that any houses were actually damaged. This would seem to place the MMI at about 5, as it is plotted here. Based on the maximum reported shaking, which was in the extreme category of MMI 11, as well as the vast area that experienced moderate or strong shaking, which stretched to southern Canada, this event is now estimated to have been magnitude 7.5 to 8. Note, though, that there was no direct measures of its magnitude, since there were no seismographs at this time. In producing iso-seismal maps, especially for historic earthquakes, we must be alert to possible sources of bias. One potential bias is the proximity of the earthquake to population centres. For example, in 1811, hardly any European settlers lived west of the Mississippi River. Fortunately, there are just enough accounts from the earthquake source region that this earthquake can be reliably located. Another possible bias is that personal accounts are prone to exaggeration, or even superstition. The light resembling the tail of a comet at the end of the newspaper clipping is at best a coincidence, and quite possibly just made up or delusional. Iso-seismal maps for modern earthquakes are generated routinely in many parts of the world, using two sources of data. Accelerometers are a type of seismometer designed specifically to record very strong ground shaking from nearby earthquakes. In the worst cases, these accelerations can greatly exceed the acceleration due to gravity, or g, and shaking of this intensity causes scientific broadband instruments to clip. Conversely, the accelerometers are insensitive to small ground motions from distant events. These two types of seismometer are each important in their own way, and are highly complementary to one another. Secondly, felt reports can now be collected much more efficiently thanks to the modern internet. Citizen science websites like the United States Geological Survey's Did You Feel It? service allow anyone to fill out a questionnaire detailing their own account of an earthquake. Each response is geotagged. In densely populated parts of the U.S., this can provide tens of thousands of individual data points for the U.S. Geological Survey's iso-seismal maps. Natural Resources Canada offer a similar online questionnaire for earthquakes. If you ever feel an earthquake, I urge you to complete a Did You Feel It? questionnaire since the data collected can be invaluable to scientists and engineers. Iso-seismal maps are produced as a standardized product by the USGS for all large earthquakes in all parts of the world. We'll now use some examples to explore the various factors that control how these intensities are distributed. This iso-seismal map shows shaking generated by the 2016 magnitude 7.8 Kaikoura earthquake in the South Island of New Zealand. The iso-seismal contours are based on these actual data, with contours and data points both coloured according to modified Macaulay intensity. Triangles are accelerometer instruments, and circles are human reports of shaking submitted to the USGS Did You Feel It? website. Peak intensities were about 9 or violent. Peak ground accelerations exceeded 1g at the three red triangles. For simplicity, we'll now remove the data points and show just the iso-seismal contours. Here I've plotted the Kaikoura earthquake epicentre where slip initiated, together with its surface rupture, which extends northeast of the epicentre for about 120 kilometres. The general pattern is one of a reduction in intensity with increasing distance from the earthquake rupture, caused by attenuation of the surface waves. Think back to how ripples in a pond reduce in height as they spread out. However, if you look closely, you will see that the iso-seismal contours are somewhat drawn out towards the northeast. This is illustrated by comparison between the major cities of Christchurch and Wellington. These two cities are equidistant from the earthquake rupture, the black line. But whereas Christchurch experienced moderate to rather strong shaking, Wellington experienced strong to very strong shaking, up to two categories higher on the MMI scale. Why was this? The answer is that Wellington suffered from a directivity effect. Earthquakes do not rupture the entire fault in one go. Rather, slip migrates across the fault plane, much like the way the slider on a zipper moves as you unzip a jacket. The direction in which the slip migrates is known as the directivity. Slip in the Kaikoura rupture migrated from the epicentre in the southwest, the black circle, towards the northeast, at a velocity of about two kilometres per second. This is similar to the velocity of the surface waves that the earthquake was emitting as it went along. This acts to greatly amplify the surface waves in that direction. The effect is analogous to the way jet aircraft produce a sonic boom as they reach the speed of sound. This so-called directivity effect can be a big factor in patterns of ground shaking in large earthquakes. For example, seismologists in California worry a lot about the directivity of the next large earthquake on the southern San Andreas fault, which hasn't ruptured in about 300 years, and is considered by many seismologists to be overdue. What's shown in this video is a simulation of the worst case scenario along the San Andreas fault, an earthquake which initiates close to the Mexico border and ruptures northwestwards towards Los Angeles with a rupture velocity close to the surface wave velocity. Red and yellow colours indicate the ground shaking at one-second intervals during the earthquake, which can be tracked by the green digital clock on the left. The northwestern tip of the rupture is marked by the brightest white colours and can be seen migrating northwestwards. You'll see how this northwestward directivity results in surface waves becoming trapped within the Los Angeles basin, which sits just to the west of the San Andreas fault, where they cause pronounced shaking. Here are the seismic waves entering the Los Angeles basin. A much better scenario, at least for everyone living in Los Angeles, would be an earthquake that nucleates near Los Angeles and ruptures southeastwards towards the Mexico border. Although in this case the epicentre of the earthquake would lie much closer to Los Angeles, the strongest surface waves would be radiated away from the city. This demonstrates the importance of rupture directivity. Next, we'll look at another factor that is important in governing ground shaking patterns. We will toggle between the isoseismal maps for two magnitude 5.8 earthquakes, one at Mineral Virginia in 2011 and the other at Mexali in Baja California in 2009. Both earthquakes were shallow, with focal depths of about six kilometres. What differences do you observe between the isoseismal contours as I toggle between the two maps? You should notice that even though the two events shared the same magnitude and occurred at about the same depth, the Mineral Virginia earthquake generated shaking over a much wider area than the Mexicali earthquake. These differences can also be seen in these graphs of reported intensity as a function of distance for the same pair of events. This graph shows data for the Mineral Virginia earthquake. The pink and purple circles and uncertainty bars show median, mean and standard deviations of reported intensities over individual did you feel it responses shown in light blue. The expected pattern of decreasing intensity with increasing distance or attenuation is a clear. These data fit a USGS model attenuation curve for the eastern US, shown by the solid green line, quite well. This graph shows the data for the Mexicali earthquake. The attenuation effect is again clear and the data fit a USGS model attenuation curve for California, the purple solid line, also quite well. However, as we start to toggle between the two events, note that intensities from the Mineral earthquake were generally stronger with a more gradual attenuation effect, while intensities from the Mexicali earthquake were generally weaker with a steeper attenuation curve. The fact that both data sets fit regional attenuation models quite well shows that the distinct patterns in ground shaking for the two earthquakes were expected and represent geographical differences in seismic wave attenuation. These differences are thought to be partly related to the distinct tectonic histories of the eastern and western margins of our continent. Western North America is an active plate boundary system in which the continental crust is broken up by numerous faults. The shattered nature of the crust has the effect of strongly attenuating passing seismic waves. Eastern North America, on the other hand, has been tectonically inactive for about 200 million years. Its crust is less shattered by active faults, which has the effect that seismic waves are only weakly attenuated. Earthquakes on the eastern side of the continent are much less frequent than those in the west, but are felt over far wider areas because of this attenuation effect. Next, we'll look at another important factor, the depth of the earthquake. We will toggle between isoseismal maps for two magnitude 7.1 earthquakes. The first, shown here, is the 6th of July 2019 Ridgecrest earthquake, which ruptured faults within the top 10 kilometers of the upper crust. The second, shown here, is the 30th of November 2018 Anchorage earthquake in Alaska. Like Ridgecrest, it was magnitude 7.1, but Anchorage was an intermediate depth earthquake, with its hypocenter lying about 50 kilometers beneath the surface. As I toggle between the two isoseismal maps, what differences do you observe, and how are these explained? Firstly, you'll see that the peak intensities were higher in the Ridgecrest earthquake, reaching MMI 8, destructive, to 9, violent. In the Anchorage earthquake, peak intensities were merely very strong, or MMI 7. Secondly, encountering this first effect, you will see that rather strong to very strong shaking, at MMI 5 to 7, was felt over a much smaller area in the Ridgecrest earthquake than in Anchorage. Both these effects are caused by the difference in earthquake depth. The Ridgecrest earthquake was much shallower, rupturing from a depth of about 15 kilometers all the way to the surface, so strong shaking was focused narrowly along the causative faulting. The Anchorage earthquake was much deeper, a whole 50 kilometers beneath the city of Anchorage, so peak intensities were weaker than in Ridgecrest, but the shaking was spread out over a much wider area. The Anchorage earthquake occurred in the Alaska subduction zone, where oceanic lithosphere of the Pacific plate subducts northwards beneath continental North America. The red contours on this map mark the depth at the top of the Pacific plate, in kilometers below the surface. The Anchorage earthquake hypercenter is at a depth of 50 kilometers, which is what seismologists refer to as an intermediate depth earthquake. The contours show that in this region, the top of the subducting slab is at a depth of about 35 kilometers. This means that the earthquake occurred within the subducting slab. Therefore, another name for an intermediate depth earthquake is an intra-slab earthquake, intra spelled I-N-T-R-A, meaning within. The spacing of the slab contours also demonstrates that the slab is bending in this area. Note how the contours are spaced farther apart to the south of the earthquake and closer together north of it. Also, although like all subduction zones, this is a convergent plate boundary, this was actually an extensional normal faulting earthquake. It is the bending of the slab that drives this extension, much like the snapping of this plank of wood leads to extension along its upper surface. Later, we'll see that intermediate depth intra-slab earthquakes pose a significant hazard here in Cascadia too, and especially in places where the subducting Wanda Fuca slab is bending. The Puget Sound region close to Seattle is one such place. Fortunately, the slab does not appear to be bending right beneath Victoria. It's therefore thought to be unlikely that we could experience an earthquake of this type There was one other factor that played a significant role in ground shaking in the Anchorage earthquake. Anchorage lies within the Cook Inlet, a sedimentary basin that contains a few thousand feet of unconsolidated sediments, mud, sand, and gravel. These loose sediments are likely to have amplified the ground shaking over a much wider region than the Cook Inlet, which is a sedimentary basin that likely to have amplified the ground shaking over a much wider region than had the earthquake struck on the more solid bedrock outside of the Cook Inlet. This effect is known as basin amplification, and we'll see how it works in the following video. Apologies for the terrible music. The motion of similar buildings on different bedrock will be exaggerated to show the arrival of compressive P, shearing S, and rolling surface waves from a regional earthquake. Three consecutive seismograms will show the changing frequency and amplitude resulting from the change in rock type. The initial P wave arrives with a compressive bump and rarely causes much damage. The slower shearing S wave introduces a side-to-side motion that can throw loose objects to the floor and may crack walls. The rolling surface waves are the most damaging in unconsolidated sediment. As surface waves enter the sedimentary layer, they slow down and increase in size, causing buildings to roll. If not engineered for the motion, they can crack and tumble. But even a well-engineered building can sink during the shaking and liquefaction of underlying wet sediment. The first seismogram from the pink building on solid ground shows low amplitude, high frequency waves. When the waves hit softer ground, they slow down and increase in amplitude. It's this higher slowing roll that is so destructive during an earthquake. This next video shows ground displacements recorded by a GPS instrument in Kathmandu, Nepal, during the 2015 magnitude 7.8 Gorkha earthquake. The graph shows east-west motion of the GPS sensor along the x-axis and north-south motion along the y-axis, both in meters. The GPS displacement is synchronized with CCTV footage of a busy shopping precinct. You can see the crowd swaying to and fro as the GPS sensor moves. The initial large southeastward and westward swings in GPS location represent the passage of the main surface waves. After these have passed, note how the ground continues to oscillate eastwards and westwards with a period of about two seconds. Like Anchorage, Alaska, Kathmandu sits within a valley that contains a thick sequence of loose sedimentary rocks. The resonance effect that you see here is common in such sedimentary basins. Unconsolidated sedimentary rocks can therefore both amplify the size of the surface waves and thus the intensity that is felt, but they can also prolong the duration of the strong shaking. To really illustrate this effect, we need to compare ground motions from inside Kathmandu Valley with motions just outside the sedimentary basin. This second video demonstrates just this. The yellow circle is an instrument inside Kathmandu Valley, the same one that was shown in the previous video, and the purple circle is an instrument located on harder bedrock just outside the valley. The instrument located inside Kathmandu Valley resonates long after the GPS instrument outside the basin has stopped moving. You Extreme examples of basin amplification and resonance effects were observed in the 19th of September 2017 magnitude 7.1 Puebla earthquake in central Mexico. This is the earthquake indicated by the black star in the western part of this map. It occurred 11 days after an even larger event on the same subduction zone, the star in the central part of the map, but the great distance between the two suggests that this was merely a coincidence. The beach ball circles represent older seismicity, coloured according to depth. The hypercentre of the Puebla earthquake, the northwestern star, was located at a depth of about 48 kilometres, making this an intermediate depth earthquake. It was also an intra-slab earthquake occurring within oceanic lithosphere of the Cocos plate, where it subducts northwards beneath the North American plate. The earthquake involved normal faulting, likely caused by flexure or bending in the Cocos plate as it begins to dive into the mantle asthenosphere. You'll see that there are many similarities with the 2018 Anchorage earthquake that we looked at earlier. The isoseismal map for the Puebla earthquake shows an extreme example of the basin amplification effect. The strongest ground shaking was not close to the epicentre, but instead about 100 kilometres to the northwest beneath Mexico City. Moreover, this map illustrates how collapsed buildings, tagged in red, were concentrated in a single band that crosses the western part of the city. This video shows the collapse of one of these buildings. Shaking already seems to have stopped, and so this likely occurred a few seconds after the earthquake. The basin amplification observed in this earthquake is related to the history of Mexico City. This goes back to 1519, when Spanish settlers advanced upon and conquered the Aztec city of Tenochtitlan, which was located on an island in a system of lakes. Later, as their own city grew, the Spanish drained the lakes and built Mexico City on the dried lake bed. The city therefore sits atop a thick pile of loose, unconsolidated sediment. These graphs show ground accelerations recorded by two accelerometer instruments, one located within the former lake bed and one just outside it, in the 2017 earthquake. The y-axis shows peak acceleration as a function of g, the acceleration due to Earth's gravity. The x-axis shows how these accelerations vary as a function of the wave period in seconds. The three coloured lines show data from the three components of the accelerometer, two horizontal components and one vertical component. You can see that accelerations caused by short period waves, those less than about 0.5 seconds, are about the same inside and outside of the former lake bed. However, at longer periods of one to three seconds, the ground accelerations inside the former lake bed are much stronger than those outside it. This is the basin amplification effect. Here's a simple interpretation of the surface waves inside and outside the former lake bed. Inside we see large long period waves, outside we see much smaller short period waves. Another important factor in sedimentary basins is liquefaction. This describes how water-saturated soils and sediments lose strength as they are shaking. You may have accounted this effect at the beach. If you shake your foot to and fro while standing on wet sand, the sand will liquefy and you will sink slightly into it. In other words, material that is ordinarily a solid can suddenly liquefy when shaken. The effect is demonstrated in this video. You may have accounted this effect at the beach. If you shake your foot to and fro while standing on wet sand, the sand will liquefy and you will sink slightly into it. In other words, material that is ordinarily a solid can suddenly liquefy when shaken. The sand will liquefy when shaken. In other words, the sedimentary basins are not always a solid, but they are Here are some photos of damage caused by liquefaction in the 2018 Anchorage earthquake. There were no surface ruptures in this earthquake. It was far too deep, confined within the subducting Pacific plate. The cracking in these photos is therefore not surface rupturing and does not follow the trend of a fault line. Instead, what we see is deformation caused by ground shaking, both basin amplification and liquefaction. The liquefaction effect is probably best demonstrated in this photograph of damage to a causeway. If we zoom out, we can see that the liquefaction is restricted to where the road crosses a marsh. The sediments within the marsh were water saturated and liquefied. The rock outside of the marsh was presumably not water saturated and so it did not liquefy. These older photographs show images of very similar deformation following the 1964 Alaska earthquake. This was a subduction megathrust earthquake occurring much further from Anchorage than the 2018 earthquake, but with a much larger magnitude of 9.4. Anchorage suffered severe damage from liquefaction in this earthquake too. Damage was worst in the Turner Gain neighborhood, which lost a total of 75 houses to liquefaction and related landsliding. The area was deemed unsafe to rebuild on. The destroyed area has since been turned into a public space called Earthquake Park. In the last part of the lecture, we'll take what we've just learned and consider two questions. Firstly, which of Victoria or Vancouver has the greater risk from large earthquakes? You can see in this cartoon map and cross section that Victoria lies much closer to the subduction zone than Vancouver does. Secondly, which type of earthquake is most hazardous to coastal BC? We will consider three earthquake categories. Firstly, megathrust earthquakes in the magnitude range of 8 to 9 on the North America Wanda Fuka plate interface, highlighted here in red. The last such earthquake was in 1700. Secondly, deeper earthquakes within the subducting Wanda Fuka oceanic plate, highlighted in magenta. The last of this type of intraslab earthquake occurred in 2001 at Nisqually in Washington state. And third, shallow crustal earthquakes in the overriding North American continental plate, highlighted here in yellow. There are historical examples of such earthquakes in 1872 in northern Washington state, and also in 1946 with the damaging Port Alberni earthquake, represented here by the yellow circle on the central Vancouver island. We'll start by looking at the first of these questions. Which of Victoria or Vancouver has the greater risk from large earthquakes? Victoria is built upon solid bedrock, mostly hard igneous and metamorphic rocks. Much of the southern Vancouver metro area, on the other hand, is constructed upon much softer rocks, namely sediments of the Fraser River Delta. Therefore, although Victoria lies much closer to the source of the largest earthquakes in our region, the Cascadian megathrust fault off Vancouver Island, we would expect Vancouver to experience more in the way of basin amplification, basin resonance and liquefaction. So the jury is probably out on this question. Now the second question, which type of earthquake is most hazardous to coastal BC? Until quite recently, most of the attention in Cascadia focused on threats posed by megathrust earthquakes like the 1700 earthquake, and to a slightly lesser extent, intermediate depth intraslab earthquakes like the 2001 Nisqually earthquake. However, recent technological advances have revealed a number of upper crustal faults that are thought to pose a major threat. One of these faults crosses this Google Earth satellite photograph just west of Seattle, but its presence was only revealed through airborne laser swath mapping or LIDAR, a technology introduced only in the past two decades. LIDAR uses a laser scanner to penetrate the forest canopy, which can be stripped away to reveal the underlying earth's surface. LIDAR mapping in the early 2000s revealed a sharp east-west fault scarp belonging to the Seattle fault. The scarp cuts through large north-south striations carved at the end of the last glaciation. This tells us that the fault has been active in one or more earthquakes in the past 13,000 years. Computer models show that an earthquake that ruptured the full length of the Seattle fault, the black line in the centre of this colour map, would likely be about magnitude 7. This would produce a narrow band of violent ground shaking, that is, MMI of about 9, that would be centred very close to Seattle. This is the area coloured red in this map. Expected ground shaking in a magnitude 9 Cascadia megathrust earthquake, on the other hand, would affect a far wider region, but might only hit Macaulay intensities of about 8. Note that the map here only covers Washington state. This megathrust earthquake would produce similar patterns in southern BC, Oregon and northern California. The magnitude 9 earthquake is 1,000 times larger in seismic moment than the magnitude 7 earthquake, but its location offshore means that the peak intensities here on the North American continent are somewhat lower. Seattle, for example, might experience very strong shaking of MMI 7. This is two categories lower than for a magnitude 7 earthquake on the local Seattle fault. The answer to the question then is that crustal earthquakes pose the highest localised hazard in Cascadia, but offshore megathrust earthquakes pose the greatest cumulative hazard, since they would impact such a vast area. We can see these effects when we consider global patterns of earthquake damage. The circles on this map are the deadliest earthquakes of the 20th and 21st centuries, each killing more than 10,000 people. Each earthquake is scaled by the number of fatalities and coloured by its moment magnitude. What we see is that the great majority of these events were in the magnitude range 7 to 8, coloured lime green through yellow to orange. Most involved shallow continental faults and only a handful involved subduction megathrust faults. The two largest magnitude earthquakes on this map, the dark red circles in Japan in 2011 and Indonesia in 2004, were not the deadliest pair of events. This is also shown on this graph where total earthquake fatalities are separated according to moment magnitude along the x-axis and coloured by tectonic setting, with continental earthquakes in pink and subduction earthquakes in blue. The number of different earthquakes contributing to each bar is given by the number at the top. This again shows that while subduction zone earthquakes can be much larger in magnitude than continental earthquakes, it is the latter which have killed the greater number of people. That completes this lecture.