This lecture will introduce earthquake magnitude and intensity scales. It's important that you understand the fundamental difference between these two types of scale. Magnitude describes the physical size of the earthquake, whereas intensity describes the strength of shaking that the earthquake produces. This first video will focus on earthquake magnitude scales and the factors that govern the magnitude of an earthquake. We'll also look at the global frequencies of earthquakes with different magnitudes and discuss the differences between foreshocks, mainshocks and aftershocks. Magnitude is the term used to describe the physical size of an earthquake. The first formulation of a magnitude scale was by Charles Richter, an American seismologist based at Caltech in 1935. He developed a scale in order to compare earthquakes recorded regionally within Southern California and by a specific type of instrument known as a Wood-Anderson seismograph, which was state-of-the-art at that time. Large magnitude earthquakes naturally produce large amplitude seismic waves, but wave amplitudes also decay with distance from the earthquake, just as ripples in a pond lose their height as they spread out. Richter's magnitudes were therefore determined by taking the largest amplitude recorded on a seismogram and correcting for the distance of the seismometer from the earthquake. We'll now run through a graphical demonstration of how Richter's scale worked. This seismogram shows a Californian earthquake with clear P-wave and S-wave arrivals. The separation time between these arrivals, written here as S minus P, is 24 seconds. From this, we can estimate the distance between the seismograph and the earthquake as 220 kilometres. We learned how to do this earlier in the course. The peak amplitude of the seismic waves can be read off the seismogram. It's 23 millimetres. Richter's formula relating the distance, magnitude and peak amplitude will be shown graphically. Note that distance and amplitude are both on logarithmic axes. A straight line drawn between the distance, 220 kilometres, and the amplitude, 23 millimetres, crosses the magnitude scale at exactly 5. This earthquake is therefore assigned a Richter magnitude of 5.0. What if the same earthquake were recorded by a closer-in seismograph at a distance of, say, 100 kilometres? We can draw a new line connecting 100 kilometres on the distance scale and passing through 5.0 on the magnitude scale. Extrapolating the line, it touches the amplitude scale at 100 millimetres. The Richter scale thus defines a magnitude 5.0 earthquake as one that generates 23 millimetres peak ground displacement at 220 kilometres distance, and 100 millimetres of peak ground displacement at 100 kilometres distance. Next, imagine a second earthquake which occurred at the same original distance of 220 kilometres, but which generated only one tenth of the peak displacement, or 2.3 millimetres. What magnitude would this be? Drawing the line between 220 kilometres and 2.3 millimetres, we cross the magnitude scale at exactly 4.0. This helps to demonstrate the logarithmic nature of the Richter magnitude scale. Each unit decrease in magnitude, such as from 5.0 to 4.0, represents a tenfold reduction in the amplitude of the seismic waves recorded at a given distance. Charles Richter applied his scale to southern California earthquakes. However, it was difficult to export to other regions and it didn't work well for distant earthquakes recorded at epicentral distances of thousands of kilometres. As recorded by the Wood-Anderson seismograph, earthquakes also appeared to saturate at a magnitude of around 6. In other words, as earthquakes got larger still than 6, the peak seismogram amplitude stopped increasing in the way that they did over smaller magnitude ranges. Nowadays, we call Richter's original scale the local magnitude scale for California. Other local magnitude scales have been developed for other regions. Local magnitude scales are still in use, but only for describing small earthquakes that are only recorded locally and which are too faint to be detected long distances away. For moderate and large magnitude earthquakes, which can be detected globally, these local magnitude scales have long been superseded. A more robust scale that can be applied globally, called the moment magnitude scale, is now in wider use, and we'll come back to this shortly. However, be aware that many journalists still like to use the phrase Richter magnitude when describing earthquakes in the news. This is erroneous. What they are really describing, and what working seismologists at universities or at government monitoring agencies actually report, is the moment magnitude. Before defining the moment magnitude, we will first look at the seismic moment, which is the truest measure of an earthquake's energy. The seismic moment is the product of the earthquake rupture area, the average slip, and the shear modulus of the surrounding rock. For well-recorded modern earthquakes, both the rupture area and the average slip are fairly easy to determine from modelling digital seismograms or satellite measurements of ground deformation. The equation shows, as is intuitive, that earthquakes involving large slip across large rupture areas have large seismic moments. The shear modulus is a measure of the resistance to deformation by shear stress, and represents the stiffness of the rocks that host the earthquake. The larger the shear modulus, the harder it is to shear the rock, and the more work the earthquake has to do to generate slip over a fault plane. For Earth's crust, where all shallow earthquakes occur, the shear modulus can be approximated to 3 times 10 to the 10 newtons per metre squared. A newton per metre squared is the same as a pascal. The units of moment are therefore in newton metres, which are closely related to, but not quite the equivalent, of the SI unit for energy, the joule. One joule is defined as the work done when a force of one newton acts on an object through a distance of one metre in the direction of the force's motion. One joule can therefore also be written as one newton metre. However, the seismic moment is a torque, which is the rotational equivalent of a linear force. Torque can be thought of as a twist to an object around a specific axis, and is equal to the product of the force applied in newtons, and the distance of the object from the centre of rotation in metres. Torque and seismic moment therefore also have the units of newton metres, but unlike energy with the joule, no special name has been allocated. The moment magnitude scale, which was first introduced in the 1970s, is related to the seismic moment by this equation. The scale is based on the seismic moment, but transforms it into a more intuitive system of numbers that is easier for us to interpret. The use of the logarithm, as well as the two constants, the numbers 9 and 1.5, were chosen such that the moment magnitude scale approximates the Richter scale for small to moderate sized Californian earthquakes. This made it intuitive to seismologists at the time. However, the moment magnitude scale also offered some distinct advantages. The first advantage is that because the scale relates directly to seismic moment, it does not saturate as earthquakes exceed a particular size. This contrasts with the Richter scale, which has no basis in the seismic moment and saturates at about magnitude 6. Secondly, because it is straightforward to calculate seismic moments from digital seismograms or satellite measurements of ground deformation, it is equally simple to calculate moment magnitudes. This contrasts with the Richter magnitude scale, which had to be calculated using a specific type of seismograph, the Wood-Anderson seismograph, which by the 1970s had long been superseded. Here we list some moment magnitudes with their equivalent seismic moments. We can see some simple patterns. An increase of one unit in moment magnitude is equivalent to a 10 to the power 1.5 or 31.6 times increase in seismic moment. An increase of two units in moment magnitude is therefore equivalent to a 10 to the power 3 or 1,000 times increase in seismic moment. In other words, a magnitude 7.0 earthquake is about 32 times larger than a magnitude 6.0 earthquake and 1,000 times larger than a magnitude 5.0. A consequence of this is that fractions of a unit matter. For example, a magnitude 7.2 earthquake might not sound much larger than a magnitude 7.0 earthquake, but in fact it has twice the seismic moment. Earthquake scientists also like using descriptive terms when discussing moment magnitudes, some of which I've introduced already. Earthquakes of about magnitude 2 to 3 are called small. Those with magnitudes of around 4 to 5 are moderate earthquakes. Those at 6 or 7 are called large, and those greater than magnitude 8 are called great earthquakes. Next, we'll consider what it is that actually governs an earthquake's moment magnitude. We know that moment magnitude is related to seismic moment, which equals rupture area times average slip times the shear modulus. The latter can be assumed to be roughly constant for all shallow earthquakes within the crust. A useful observation is that the first two values, rupture area and average slip, appear to correlate over several orders of earthquake magnitude, as shown in this plot. This shows average slip plotted against surface rupture length, which we can use as a proxy for rupture area, for several crustal earthquakes. Note that both axes are logarithmic and the data span about two orders of magnitude. The clear positive trend shows that average slip correlates well with rupture length and by extension with rupture area. This allows us to make some generalisations about the expected rupture lengths and the average amounts of slip for earthquakes with different moment magnitudes. For example, magnitude 6 earthquakes typically involve rupture lengths in the order of 10km and average slip of about 30cm. Magnitude 7 earthquakes typically involve rupture lengths in the order of 60km and slip of about 1.5m. Since rupture area and average slip correlate across a wide range of magnitudes, it is really the rupture area that is key to governing the seismic moment and moment magnitude of an earthquake. Put very simply, size matters when it comes to earthquakes. Large earthquakes involve large slip over a large rupture area. Moderate earthquakes involve a moderate amount of slip across a moderately sized rupture area. And small earthquakes involve a small amount of slip over a small rupture area. This cartoon demonstrates another key point, which is that since fault planes are not infinite, the rupture area is actually restricted. The total fault plane area therefore provides a useful way of anticipating the largest possible earthquake magnitude we could expect on any given mapped fault. Let's apply this understanding to the most dangerous two faults in North America. Firstly, the Cascadia subduction megathrust, which forms the Juan de Fuca North America plate boundary between offshore Vancouver Island to offshore Northern California. And secondly, the San Andreas strike-slip fault, which forms the main Pacific North America plate boundary south of the Mendocino triple junction. We'll ask the question, which of these two faults is capable of hosting the larger earthquake? Both faults are around 1000 km long, so the maximum rupture length would be about the same. However, their potential rupture widths are very different. Fault width is the distance between the top and the bottom of a fault. The Cascadia megathrust is gently inclined, dipping at an angle of a few degrees beneath the North American plate, and so its rupture width could be 100 km or more. The San Andreas fault, a strike-slip fault, is vertical, and so its rupture width is only about 10 to 20 km. Because area is length times width, the rupture area of a Cascadia earthquake could therefore be 5 times or more that of a San Andreas earthquake. This explains why the 1000 km long Cascadia megathrust is believed capable of hosting magnitude 9 earthquakes, but the 1000 km long San Andreas fault is thought to be limited to earthquakes of about magnitude 8. There are some very important unknowns in just how large the inevitable next Cascadia megathrust earthquake will be. Firstly, will it rupture the full 1000 km length of the subduction zone, from offshore Vancouver Island all the way down to offshore Northern California? Geological evidence suggests that some prehistoric Cascadia megathrust earthquakes did just that, but others are estimated to have ruptured in the same way. Cascadia megathrust earthquakes did just that, but others only ruptured smaller portions of the plate boundary, producing magnitudes probably in the mid-8s rather than 9 or more. Secondly, what will the down-dip, lower limit of the rupture area be? In the 2011 Tohoku earthquake offshore Japan, an analogue for the worst Cascadia earthquake, co-seismic slip, or slip during the earthquake, occurred from the seafloor all the way down to a depth of 40 km. If Cascadia behaves this way, this would be equivalent to the earthquake rupturing all the way from the Pacific seafloor 100 km west of Vancouver Island all the way to directly underneath Victoria. This would involve an enormous rupture area and give rise to a very large moment magnitude. Fortunately, most geophysicists working on the Cascadia subduction zone believe that at depths of 30-40 km, the subduction fault releases strain episodically but peacefully, accompanied by tiny earthquakes called tremor. It's therefore considered unlikely that the next Cascadia earthquake would rupture past about 30 km depth. However, this is still much deeper than the thickness of the seismogenic zone along the San Andreas fault, which is only 10-20 km. There's therefore no doubt that Cascadia can produce much the larger earthquakes. This contrast between the largest subduction megathrust earthquakes and the largest continental earthquakes holds when we extend our comparison globally. Of the 20 largest earthquakes since 1900, spanning the magnitude range 8.4 to 9.5, 17 were subduction megathrust earthquakes, shown here in red, and only three, in yellow, occurred in other tectonic settings. Moreover, the eight largest earthquakes of all, each with a moment magnitude greater than 8.8, all involve rupture of megathrust faults. We can also take what we've learned so far and ask the question, what is the largest conceivable earthquake? We'll use the equations for seismic moment and moment magnitude, shown here, and we'll also make some assumptions about the rupture area of this hypothetical event. To start off, we'll want to find the longest continuous subduction megathrust fault in the world. This would be the subduction megathrust fault along the Nazca South American Plate boundary, which is about 6,000 km long. Taking the dip of the megathrust fault as 20 degrees, and assuming that slip reaches a maximum depth of 40 km, an approximate lower limit for subduction zones, then by trigonometry, the down-dip fault width is about 40 over sine 20 degrees, or about 120 km. Therefore, the rupture area is 6,000 km times 120 km. Because moment is given in Nm, the numbers here are given in m. For slip, we'll use the largest slip ever observed in a subduction megathrust earthquake, again the 2011 Tohoku earthquake, which was 50 m. For the shear modulus, we'll use 3 times 10 to the 10 Nm2. This gives us a final moment of about 1 times 10 to the 24 Nm. The logarithm of this number is simply 24. Subtract 9 to get 15, and divide by 1.5, and you get the answer. Magnitude 10.0, exactly. So this is a reasonable estimate of the largest possible earthquake. We can surmise that the producers of this movie, 10.0 Earthquake, The End Is Near, did their homework, although I'm not keen on the way their fault opens up like a chasm. This movie, on the other hand, 10.5 The Day the Earth Would Not Stand Still, is an absolute travesty. Their budget clearly did not extend to hiring any science consultant. Next, we'll look at the frequency of earthquakes of different magnitudes around the world. Another of Charles Richter's notable achievements, along with devising the first magnitude scale, was his observation that for each unit increase in magnitude, there was about a tenfold reduction in the frequency of earthquakes. He published this important observation with his colleague Benno Gutenberg in 1956. The relationship, nowadays called the Gutenberg-Richter Law, holds both globally and also within individual regions, such as California or Cascadia. Some of the global statistics are shown in this graphic. Rounding to the nearest magnitude unit, there are typically about 10,000 magnitude 4 earthquakes each year, roughly 30 per day, somewhere around the world. There are usually between 1,000 and 2,000 magnitude 5 earthquakes annually, on average about 4 per day. There are 100 to 200 magnitude 6 earthquakes annually, about 1 every other day on average. And there are typically 10 to 20 magnitude 7 earthquakes annually, one or two each month. There are one or two magnitude 8 earthquakes in the typical year, and there are typically one or two magnitude 9 earthquakes in the typical decade. It's important to recognise that these numbers are averages and have absolutely no predictive power. For example, just because there has not yet been a magnitude 8 or greater earthquake this year, does not make it any more likely that there will be one in the remaining few months of the year. Indeed, if we look back at the past century of very large and great earthquakes, we see random fluctuations in the numbers of the largest events. On this graph, each vertical line topped with a grey circle represents an earthquake greater than magnitude 7.5. The y-axis is moment magnitude. Focusing on the great earthquakes exceeding magnitude 8, we can see that the past several years have been an unusually busy period. In fact, 18 magnitude 8 plus earthquakes occurred in the 11 years from 2004 through 2014, which is when this graph stops. There are the 18 blue beach balls on this map. Six of these earthquakes were magnitude 8.5 or greater, and two of them reached magnitude 9. In contrast, over nearly twice this length of time, from 1980 to 2000, a paltry eight earthquakes reached magnitude 8, and the largest of these was just magnitude 8.3. The current consensus among seismologists is that this is down to random chance, that this is an area of active research. Rearranging the moment magnitude equation, we can see that each unit increase in moment magnitude corresponds to a 10 to the power 1.5 or about 32 fold increase in seismic moment. However, recall from the Gutenberg-Richter law that for each unit increase in moment magnitude, there are about 10 times fewer earthquakes. The consequence of this is that the largest earthquakes dominate the global cumulative seismic moment release. This graph shows the cumulative moment released in all recorded earthquakes over the past century from 1900 to 2000. Rather incredibly, the largest earthquake on record, the 1960 magnitude 9.5 Valdivia earthquake in Chile, is responsible for about one quarter of all of the seismic moment released in this time. Four other magnitude 9 earthquakes, also shown here, contribute another quarter. So that fully half of all of the energy released from all earthquakes in the past century comes from just five events. Look at the scale on the y-axis and think back to our thought experiment about the largest possible earthquake. If you added up all of the earthquakes from the past century into a single earthquake, its moment would be 10 to the 24 Newton meters. In other words, a magnitude 10.0. Over the next few slides, we'll look at the distinctions between foreshocks, mainshocks and aftershocks. Large earthquakes always occur as part of earthquake sequences that also involve many, many smaller events. The largest earthquake in the sequence is always called the mainshock. Mainshocks are also always followed by a series of smaller aftershocks. Some of the time there are earthquakes that come before the mainshock and these are called foreshocks. The graph here shows one such sequence near Anchorage, Alaska in early 2018. The y-axis is earthquake magnitude and the x-axis is the magnitude of the earthquake. Each circle represents one earthquake. The color of the circle is focal depth, but it's not important here. You can see that the earliest earthquake is by far the largest at magnitude 7.9. This is, by definition, the mainshock. And in this case, we can see that the mainshock is the largest earthquake in the sequence. You can see that the earliest earthquake is by far the largest at magnitude 7.9. This is, by definition, the mainshock. And in this case, we can see that there were no foreshocks preceding the mainshock. The mainshock was followed by a series of aftershocks with the largest only about magnitude 5.8. The concentration of aftershocks seems to decay over the following several days from something like 100 earthquakes on the very first day to just a handful of earthquakes per day about a week into the sequence. We'll now see a number of similar plots for other earthquake sequences. The key take-home point is that the patterns we observe in the Alaska sequence are very common. This shows an earthquake sequence in Iran in 2017. The main difference with the Alaskan sequence is that the total number of events is much lower. Probably reflecting that there are fewer seismographs in Iran and therefore that the earthquake detection thresholds are much higher. However, the main patterns still hold. The first earthquake in the sequence is the largest, by definition the mainshock. It is followed by a sequence of aftershocks that decay in frequency over time. And the largest aftershock is about two magnitude units smaller than the mainshock. This shows the 2016 Kaikoura earthquake sequence in New Zealand. Again, we see a very similar pattern, except that the largest aftershock here is only about one magnitude unit smaller than the mainshock. This is the 2015 Gorkha sequence in Nepal. Like with the Kaikoura sequence, the largest aftershock is about one magnitude unit smaller than the mainshock. I'll go through a few more examples without naming the earthquakes. The point is not to remember the details from any particular sequence, but to note that certain patterns are very, very common. Firstly, the largest earthquake in the sequence, by definition the mainshock, is usually also the earliest earthquake in the sequence, meaning that there are no foreshocks. Secondly, large earthquakes always trigger intense aftershock activity, where the concentration of aftershocks decays through time. And thirdly, the largest aftershock is very often about one or two magnitude units smaller than the mainshock. This is a rule of thumb. Finally, we will look at an example in which the first earthquake in the sequence is not the mainshock, but rather a foreshock. Our example here is the 2019 Ridgecrest sequence in eastern California. This involved a smattering of small earthquakes on the 3rd and 4th of July, followed by a magnitude 6.4 earthquake late on the 4th of July, and then an energetic aftershock sequence, and then the magnitude 7.1 mainshock on the 6th of July, followed by even more aftershocks. Seismologists have long thought that about 5% of large earthquakes are preceded by one or more foreshocks. However, a recent study suggested that the majority of large earthquakes in California were preceded by foreshocks. This study used machine learning algorithms to detect very small earthquakes that had not previously been recognised. So perhaps most large earthquakes are preceded by very small foreshocks. The jury is still out on this question. Foreshocks are of great interest for earthquake prediction, because if you could identify them before a large earthquake strikes, you could potentially evacuate people out of harm's way. However, there is one snag. Even if foreshocks were fairly common features of large earthquake sequences, as the recent machine learning study suggests, there is no evidence that foreshocks look any different from normal small earthquakes that happen all the time. So there is no way of knowing that a small earthquake is a foreshock until after the larger mainshock has occurred. This means that in practice, foreshocks are not very helpful at all. You would certainly not want to issue an evacuation order every time a small earthquake or small cluster of earthquakes was detected, because in most cases, these would not turn out to be foreshocks. After a few such false alerts, people would quickly choose to ignore the evacuation orders. We'll now illustrate this point with a step-by-step analysis of the Ridgecrest sequence. On July 3rd, a small earthquake sequence occurs. The largest event, at this point the mainshock, is magnitude 3.5. The cluster appears to die down on July 4th. At this point, there is absolutely nothing out of the ordinary about this sequence. A sequence of small earthquakes like this one might happen once a week or more somewhere in California. Late on July 4th, a magnitude 6.4 earthquake occurs, followed quickly by hundreds of aftershocks. At this point, the magnitude 6.4 is now the mainshock. Only now do we realise that the earthquakes on July 3rd were actually foreshocks. Early on July 6th, a magnitude 7.1 earthquake occurs. This is now the mainshock. The magnitude 6.4 earthquake has to be downgraded to a large foreshock. The take-home point here is that although foreshocks do happen, and it's possible that they might even be rather common, they do not yet hold any predictive power about the possibility of subsequent larger earthquakes. This is one of the main reasons we are still a million miles away from being able to predict the magnitude 6.4. This is one of the main reasons we are still a million miles away from being able to predict earthquakes.