In the second part of the lecture, we'll look at a final case study, the 2010 Mount Meagher landslide from here in British Columbia. We'll then complete the lecture by considering global landslide risks and some ways to mitigate them. Mount Meagher is located about 150km north of Vancouver and about 240km north of Victoria. We know from the last activity class that Mount Meagher is a stratovolcano within the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt, the northern extension of the Cascade Volcanic Arc. As with all of the Cascade volcanoes, Mount Meagher owes its existence to subduction of the Wanda Fuca Plate beneath North America. Though Mount Meagher is a stratovolcano, it doesn't take the classic conical form of Mount Baker, Mount Rainier, or Mount St Helens. This partly reflects the fact that it has been more heavily impacted and eroded by glaciers. These glaciers have also stripped away many of the volcanic rocks produced in previous eruptions. Therefore, the eruptive history of the volcano is relatively poorly known by comparison with its southern neighbours in the main Cascade Arc. However, it is known to have erupted in a vulcanian-style eruption about 2,400 years ago that deposited ash fallout as far away as Alberta. The volcano still offers glimpses of its eruptive potential. For example, in 2018, eight years after the landslide that we'll look at, a number of fumaroles melted large holes in the glaciers at the top of the mountain, as shown in this drone footage. This indicates that subsurface hydrothermal activity is occurring within the body of the volcano. Mount Meagher is therefore weakened from both the outside and the inside. On the outside, glacial erosion steepens its hill slopes, bringing them closer to the point of failure. On the inside, hydrothermal fluids, and probably high pore fluid pressures, weaken the rock mass internally. Because of this, Mount Meagher poses a significant landslide risk, even outside of any volcanic eruptive activity. This was exemplified in spectacular fashion in the huge 2010 landslide. It occurred on 6 August at 3.27 in the morning. It started as a series of major rockfalls high up on the southeastern slope of the mountain. This aerial photograph from after the landslide shows this southeastern part of the summit. The dotted white line shows the headscarf of the rockfall, note the helicopter for scale circled in white. Extensive water seeps visible on the cliff face demonstrate that cracks in the volcanic rock were likely saturated with pressurized water at the time, either from hydrothermal fluids or from snow melt. Recall from the last lecture how high fluid pressures within spaces in a rock reduce its internal coefficient of friction and thus its cohesive strength. The volume of rock involved in the rockfall, estimated by digital elevation models of the volcano from before and after the landslide, is approximately 50 million cubic meters. This made it the third largest Canadian landslide in recorded history. The rockfall fell about 500 meters onto Capricorn Creek, one of the main valleys draining the Mount Meagher Massif. A small glacier at the head of the creek was impacted, and the scree slopes below the glacier were water-saturated from late summer snow melt. Entraining this ice and water-saturated material, the debris became highly fluidized and travelled rapidly down Capricorn Creek. Recall from the previous lecture that composite landslides, which start as rockfalls and evolve into debris flows, are known as rock avalanches. This is a classic example. These aerial photographs of Capricorn Creek were taken shortly after the landslide. The left photograph is captured from the head of the valley looking downstream. Again, note the helicopter for scale, circled in white. The photo on the right is from the confluence of Capricorn Creek with Meagher Creek, looking upstream. Here are two more photographs, the upper one looking down Capricorn Creek, and the lower one showing its confluence with Meagher Creek. Note how trees have been completely stripped from the slopes flanking both creeks. The rock avalanche slammed into the hillside adjacent to the confluence with Meagher Creek, and then split. One branch travelled nearly 4km upstream, and the other about 5km downstream, as far as the confluence of Meagher Creek with the main Lillooet river valley. Here the debris flow inundated upper Lillooet campground. Overall the landslide material travelled 13km horizontally, but only 2km vertically, giving an overall angle of about 10 degrees. This makes it an example of a Sturström landslide. This shows the scene at the upper Lillooet campground the next morning. Four people were camping there that night, but fortuitously had only just arrived at 3.25am, and were still unloading their gear. They report hearing two loud explosive noises in quick succession, followed by a rumbling that initially sounded like a train, but that grew to a deafening volume in about 20 seconds. They jumped back into their truck and headed for higher ground. Shortly afterwards they came face to face with a 1.5m high wall of mud. They turned their truck back around and escaped in what one of the campers described as resembling the Millennium Falcon escaping the Death Star explosion at the end of Return of the Jedi. Given the volume and speed of the landslide, as well as the timing in the summer hiking season, it is extremely lucky that nobody was killed. The landslide was also picked up by seismometers hundreds of miles away, generating ground displacements equivalent in amplitude to those produced by a magnitude 3 earthquake. The tick marks along the x-axis of the seismograms show 40 second intervals. And PGC is the Geological Survey of Canada seismograph near Victoria Airport that you used in one of the activity classes. As with the 2014 Oso landslide, analysis and modelling of the seismograms revealed the timing of the evolving landslide, including the initial rockfall impact, the rock avalanche moving down Capricorn Creek, and its impact with the mountainside at the confluence with Meagre Creek. Such analyses tell us that the time from the first rockfall to the initiation of the debris flow was about 50 seconds. The rock avalanche crashed into Meagre Creek after about 160 seconds, and about 325 seconds had passed by the time the debris flow reached the campground in the Lillooet River Valley. From these timings, we can estimate that the average speed of the Capricorn Creek rock avalanche was 70 metres per second. A velocity this high probably required a reduced coefficient of friction at the base of the landslide, as is characteristic of Sturstrom landslides. Once in Meagre Creek, the landslide slowed to about 20 metres per second, a velocity typical of large debris flows. This hill shaded topographic map shows the region surrounding Mount Meagre, labelled MMVC, the Mount Meagre Volcanic Complex. As we learned in the last activity class, one of the unusual attributes of this volcano is that all of the catchments that drain its flanks join up into a single outlet valley, the Lillooet River Valley. This focuses and amplifies the hazards associated both with debris flows and lahars. On the scale of this map, the roughly 13 kilometre long 2010 landslide was actually rather modest in size. However, it is now known that much larger debris flows are possible and have happened in the past. The white dots on the map, labelled DHPV for Drill Hole Pemberton Valley, are locations where sediments underlying the Lillooet Valley floor have been sampled through drilling. These reveal that three large debris flows, each sourced from Mount Meagre, have reached as far as Pemberton Town in the past 12,000 years. Modelling of the debris flows with different volumes shows what would be needed for the flow to reach the town of Pemberton. Here M is for Mount Meagre, the 2010 landslide is in blue, and various model debris flow deposits are shown in other colours. The modelling instead assumes a landslide sourced on the north side of the volcano, starting at the head of Job Creek rather than Capricorn Creek. The green area shows an estimate of the region that would be inundated by a debris flow with a volume of 100 million cubic metres, double that of the 2010 landslide. This would reach about 30 kilometres from the volcano, just under halfway to Pemberton. It would likely take a debris flow with about 10 times this volume, or 20 times the volume of the 2010 landslide, in other words an estimated billion cubic metres, to reach Pemberton. This is the model debris flow deposit coloured in purple. Drill holes near Pemberton show that previous debris flows have reached this far, the latest about 2,400 years ago, probably a lahar triggered by Mount Meagre's most recent major eruption. However, it is not all bad news. Assuming an average velocity of 20 metres per second, consistent with the latter stages of the 2010 landslide, a debris flow would take nearly one hour to travel the 65 kilometres from the summit of Mount Meagre to the town of Pemberton. This should provide some time to evacuate, however a warning system would need to be put in place first. This brings us to the last topic of today's lecture, landslide risks and their mitigation. Firstly, I'd like us to briefly consider some global statistics of landslide fatalities. A recent study of the years 2004 to 2010 showed that during this period there were around 2,600 individual landslides reported to have killed at least one person, not including those triggered by earthquakes. These 2,600 landslides collectively killed around 32,000 people. Averaged over the seven-year period, about 4,500 people per year are killed by about 370 individual landslides. The average deadly landslide would therefore kill about a dozen people. These numbers demonstrate an attribute to landslide risks that is quite distinct from earthquakes and which is further illustrated by this brief slideshow. There are far more deadly landslides each year than deadly earthquakes, but most of these landslides destroy a small number of buildings and kill just a handful of people. In contrast, earthquake fatalities are completely dominated by a small number of absolutely devastating events. For example, in the years 2004 to 2010, of the roughly 600,000 people killed by earthquakes, the vast majority died in just four events. Landslides are a major risk here in Canada. Western Canada is especially prone for one simple reason, high topography steepened by tectonics and glaciation. Clay-rich glacial tills deposited by retreating glaciers at the end of the Pleistocene are also a factor, but this is true across all of Canada and so does not explain the difference between east and west. Since risks are the product of hazard times vulnerability, BC is more at risk than Alberta because a large proportion of BC's population lives in mountainous terrain, whereas most of Albertans live on the prairies. Yukon has a lower risk than either because of its very sparse population. In eastern Canada, in spite of the lower topographic relief, there are elevated landslide hazards along the St Lawrence and Ottawa river valleys. As discussed in the previous lecture, lateral spread landslides are common in this region because of the thick layer of clay deposited in the Champlain Sea at the end of the Pleistocene. According to the Canadian disaster database kept by Public Safety Canada, landslides have killed more Canadians since 1900 than floods, hurricanes, tornadoes or earthquakes. Since the 1800s about 650 Canadians have lost their lives to landslides, about 40% of them in BC and around a third in Quebec. Of the 10 deadliest mass movements in Canadian history, four each occurred in BC and Quebec Note that this list includes two snow avalanches and one landslide-triggered tsunami, which we will study later in the course. So how can we actually reduce these risks? The Oso landslide, and perhaps to a lesser degree than Monte Cristo mudslides, are examples where residential zoning ignored clear evidence of elevated landslide hazards. Detailed landslide hazard maps should be used to limit development within the most failure-prone areas. This map is the current landslide hazard map for Victoria. Note the elevated landslide probabilities around many of Victoria's coastal bluffs, along Dallas Road, for example, and along the northern side of McCalls or Mount Douglas between Cordova Bay and Gordon Head. However, by far the most landslide-prone of the Victoria Metro area is the Malahat, the section of Highway 1 between Goldstream Provincial Park in the south and Mill Bay in the north. This is not a residential area, but it is a critical transportation corridor, the principal access route from Victoria to central and northern Vancouver Island. Rockfalls along the Malahat are very common and should provide ample motivation for keeping to the speed limits along this dangerous section of road, since it is much easier to brake in time for rocks on the road if you are travelling at a slower speed. Once landslide hazards have been identified, how can we go about actually reducing them? The most effective method on small slopes is to simply remove the hazard. This may involve scaling, which means removing loose rock, or benching, which means remodelling the slope as a series of steps. This road cut on the Interstate 68 in Maryland, US, has been benched. The hazard can sometimes be mechanically reduced, as demonstrated in this schematic cross-section through a rotational rock slide. Recall that rotational rock slides are driven by an imbalance between a driving mass and a resisting mass. Therefore these landslides can be prevented or stabilised either by removing driving mass from the top of the landslide, known as unloading the head, or by adding to or reinforcing the resisting mass, called supporting the toe. It is also possible to reinforce the body of the landslide, such as by drilling rock bolts or cylinder piles through the landslide, through the failure surface and into the underlying bedrock. Given the important role that water plays in many landslides, it should be no surprise that properly draining landslide-prone hill slopes can have a dramatic impact on reducing the hazard. This photograph shows a road in Albania prior to a landslide mitigation project. The slope above the road exhibits several small rotational slumps, and the road is strewn with debris and mud. In this example, an open drainage channel was excavated to divert surface runoff around the sides of the landslide. The body of the landslide has been further reinforced using meshing and rock bolts. Coastal cliffs are prone to rockfalls and rotational slumps as wave erosion undercuts their base. Beaches can provide a natural defence against this wave action, but are themselves prone to erosion and removal by shore parallel currents known as longshore drift. Therefore, the best way to stabilise coastal cliffs is to prevent the erosion of beach deposits using offshore breakwaters, as shown in this photograph from Denmark. In the steepest topography, it may not be possible to reduce the hazard itself. As a last resort, tunnels and snowsheds can be built to provide protection for roads and railway tracks against rockfalls and snow avalanches. Slow-moving landslides, such as many rotational rockslides, can sometimes be monitored remotely, such as using satellite radar, or INSAR. We came across this technique when we looked at the 2003 Bam earthquake early on in the course. INSAR works by emitting electromagnetic waves at radio frequencies, bouncing them off the Earth's surface and measuring the backscattered energy. The trick with INSAR is to fake a very large antenna by combining several adjacent images collected along the track of the satellite. This large synthetic aperture allows the radar image of Earth's surface to have a much finer spatial resolution. For each pixel on the ground, we measure both the amplitude and the phase of the backscattered radio waves. Ground deformation – this animation shows an earthquake, but it could be a large landslide – can be measured by combining the before radar image with one captured after the event. Here's the satellite on its next return. Any displacement to the Earth's surface, such as due to faulting in an earthquake or motion of a landslide, changes the distance between the ground and the satellite. So when we repeat the radar measurement, we look for small changes in the phase of the backscattered radio waves. One limitation is that these radar images are only captured about once a week over any given point on Earth's surface. There is therefore no capability of capturing a landslide in real time. However, they are useful for identifying unstable slopes ahead of time that may later evolve into a catastrophic landslide. A case study from China shows that INSAR monitoring has the potential to save lives, though it tragically came just too late in this case. On June 24, 2017, a massive debris slide occurred at Xinmou village in Sichuan province in western China, triggered by heavy rainfall. The landslide destroyed 64 homes and killed more than 100 people. These images are a time series of INSAR ground deformation maps in the Xinmou area from about six months prior to the landslide to the time of the landslide. The area that eventually failed catastrophically on June the 24th is circled. It's clear from this retrospective analysis that the landslide had been moving slowly throughout this six month interval. Had these movements been identified sooner, an early warning system might have been put in place. For example, a GPS station could have been placed on the landslide that could have picked up any acceleration of the landslide, or a trip wire could have been placed just below the landslide. These could have provided a real-time warning to the villagers below. Landslide early warning systems have been installed in a few critical areas around the world. For example, the catchments west of Mount Rainier, here in the Cascades, are instrumented with a network of geophones, also known as acoustic flow monitors, that listen out for the strong ground vibrations that would accompany a lahar or a large debris flow. The geophones are set to trigger sirens that would warn people downstream to evacuate. You should recognize that a system like this, installed in the upper Lillaret Valley near Mount Meagher, would be of great benefit to the town of Pemberton. We'll close out the lecture with a short video of a spectacular debris flow in the Ilgraben Valley in Switzerland. Debris flows are so common in this catchment that engineers have set up an early warning comprising a network of acoustic flow monitors and laser flow meters. In this video, the camera pans out and you can see a red flashing light indicating that the instruments have detected the spectacular debris flow. There's the warning light flashing. This concludes our final lecture on landslide hazards.