In today's lecture, we'll look in detail at three notable landslide case studies, and then consider global landslide risks and landslide mitigation. Our three case studies are all from the Pacific coast of North America, and two of them are from right here in the Cascadia region. In this first video, we'll look at the 2014 Oso landslide in Washington state, and the 2018 Montecito mudslides in California. As with all landslides, I'd like you to consider separately their preconditions and triggers as we explore each of these events. The first case study we will examine is the 2014 landslide in Oso in western Washington. Oso is a small community located in the foothills of the Cascadia volcanic arc, almost exactly 100km east of Victoria. Oso is located on relatively flat ground along the valley floor of the North Fork of the Stiligwamish River. However, note the steep hillsides overlooking this community. The landslide took place mid-morning of 22nd March 2014, a Saturday. The landslide was caused by the collapse of a 200m high hill slope on the north side of the Stiligwamish River, known locally as the Whitman Bench. This hillside was known to be prone to landsliding, following a moderate-sized rockslide in 2006. Tragically, the 2014 landslide was much larger, and crossed over the river, where it destroyed a neighbourhood of 35 residences, known as Steelhead Haven, on the other side. This schematic shows the residences of Steelhead Haven before the disaster. The landslide is a clear example of a composite landslide. The upper part is a clear rotational rockslide, with easily identifiable geomorphic landforms including a large headscarp, and tilted blocks separated by transverse cracks and scarps. The lower part is composed of debris, but although this material became highly fluidised during the landslide, it did not become channelised and flow down the Stiligwamish River. For this reason, I'd classify the lower part of the landslide as a debris slide, rather than a debris flow. Media accounts indicate that 58 people were within the inundation zone when the landslide occurred. Of these, 15 individuals survived and were rescued, and 43 people were killed. This was the deadliest recorded landslide disaster in the history of the continental United States. Washington state officials have estimated direct losses from the landslide to be $120 million. Several of the landslide survivors, as well as others who were located just outside of the inundation zone, provided observations and recollections of the event to the media. A number of common themes are repeated in their accounts. These include a recollection of extraordinary noise, described as like a plane crashing, and of rapid inundation by a tall, fast-moving, and highly fluidised mass of debris. Survivors also noted the soft, quicksand-like condition of the water-saturated debris slide deposits immediately following the landslide. We'll next consider some of the potential preconditions and triggers of the 2014 Oso landslide. We'll start with a couple of clear preconditions. Firstly, we know that a previous landslide had occurred on the lower slopes of Whitman Bench in 2006, shown in this airborne LiDAR topographic map collected before 2014. The headscarf of the 2006 landslide is evident halfway up the side of Whitman Bench, and the toe of the 2006 landslide can be made out on the Stiligwamish Valley floor. So the 2006 landslide may have destabilised the upper part of the mountainside. Moreover, between 2006 and 2014, a meander of the Stiligwamish River was eroding into the toe of the 2006 landslide, cutting into the base of the hillside. These are two very obvious preconditions. As for triggers, we know that in the month preceding the landslide, rainfall in the Oso area was intense, about double the normal level. This rain saturated the sedimentary rocks of the Whitman Bench, making them considerably heavier. The eroded toe of the 2006 landslide could no longer hold back this large weight of materials, and the Whitman Bench duly collapsed. The rock quickly broke up, and the water-saturated mass partially fluidised into a huge debris slide. Next, we'll look a bit more closely at the local geology and hydrology to see whether there were other important preconditions. This geological cross-section reveals that the Whitman Bench is composed of horizontally bedded sedimentary rocks, a mix of clay-rich glacial till deposited by retreating glaciers at the end of the Pleistocene, and sands and gravels deposited by rivers and streams. This photo shows the upper part of this geology, exposed by the headscarp of the 2014 landslide. Mapping the Whitman Bench is a unit marked as recessional outwash, which comprises sand deposited by rivers. Below it is a thick layer of clay-rich glacial till. The sand is highly permeable, meaning that groundwater easily seeps through it. The till, on the other hand, is impermeable, meaning that water ponds on top of it. The dribbles of water evident on this photo are groundwater seeps at the top of the glacial till, and the glacial till itself sits on top of a more fluvial sand deposit that is permeable. At the time of the 2014 landslide, therefore, the Whitman Bench was comprised of a layer of wet, slippery clay, sandwiched between layers of heavy, waterlogged sand. With reduced support at the base of the hillside, thanks to undercutting by the Stiller-Gwamish River, this was a deadly combination. A final piece in the puzzle came from seismology, the study of seismic waves. These are usually considered in the context of earthquakes, but large landslides also generate seismic waves, and the 2014 Oso landslide was well-recorded by several seismic stations located across western Washington state. Landslide seismograms lack the clear P-wave, S-wave, and surface-wave arrivals of earthquake seismograms, and are instead characterised by a single, chaotic-looking wave train. What's interesting about the Oso seismograms is that they all seem to show two distinct episodes of landsliding, separated by a short period of relative quiescence. The first episode initiated at 10.37am local time, and the second commenced 4.5 minutes later at 10.41am. This seismological evidence, together with detailed geological mapping of the landslide deposits and analysis of before and after LiDAR imagery, allowed scientists to piece together exactly what happened, and in what order. First, this cross-section shows how the 2006 landslide had partially collapsed a topographic step, marked here as a doorstop shelf, removing much of the underlying supporting material. The toe of the landslide also pushed the Stiller Guamish River channel south by about 200 metres, though it didn't reach the neighbourhood of Steelhead Haven. The first major stage of movement in the 2014 landslide involved collapse of the remainder of the doorstop shelf. This phase was a highly fluidised debris slide, which travelled rapidly across the valley and buried Steelhead Haven. The second stage of the 2014 landslide actually occurred a couple of minutes after the end of the debris slide, probably in response to the loss of buttressing and the redirection of stresses within the landslide mass. This stage involved a rotational rock slide of the upper part of Whitman Bench. Note how the deposits of the stage 2 rock slide overlay the deposits of the stage 1 debris slide. This overlapping relationship was crucial in determining the order of events. With disasters like this one, it's always worthwhile looking at what could have been done better and to try to learn from our mistakes. LiDAR imagery reveals a scalloped shape to the valley sides. Each scallop marks the head scarp of a prehistoric rock slide similar in size to the 2014 landslide. Similarly, note the hummocky appearance across much of the Stiligramish valley floor. This mimics the deposits of the 2014 debris slide, and likely represents the remains of several ancient debris slides. There is conjecture that logging in the area was a contributing factor to the 2014 landslide, but most of the landslide scars and deposits visible in the LiDAR imagery far precede any significant logging activity. Instead, one has to question why residential zoning was permitted in the Stiligramish valley. This is simply not a safe place for people to live. Our second case study is the 2018 Montecito mudflows in Southern California. The small town of Montecito is located just east of Santa Barbara, at the foot of the Santa Ynez Mountains, a tectonically active range that uplifts due to a small component of convergence along the Pacific-North America plate boundary. Montecito is extremely wealthy and a popular getaway for the rich and famous of Los Angeles. The list of current residents reads like a who's who of Hollywood A-listers, including Jeff Bridges, Tom Cruise, Ellen DeGeneres, Michael Douglas, Julia Louis-Defoe, Steve Martin, John Travolta, Bruce Willis, Owen Wilson, and Oprah Winfrey. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex, Prince Harry and Meghan, recently moved here too, but were not there at the time of the mudflows. The mudflows struck early in the morning of January 9th, 2018. They killed 23 people, making this the second deadliest landslide in North America in more than 35 years, the deadliest being the 2014 Oso landslide. 160 other people were hospitalized, and the cost of the disaster was estimated at more than 200 million US dollars. The mudflows occurred shortly after the destructive 2017 California wildfire season. This was the worst on record in terms of area burned, at 1.5 million acres, though this has been surpassed since. It was also an unusually long fire season, exacerbated by a lack of rainfall at the start of the normal rainy season in November and December. This satellite image was taken on 5th of December, just over a month before the Montecito mudslide, Seasonal dry easterly winds, known in California as the Santa Ana winds, can be seen fanning a number of large wildfires and pushing the smoke westwards over the Pacific. The northernmost of these fires, about halfway between Los Angeles and Santa Barbara, is the Thomas fire, which had started one day previously on 4th of December. Two days later, on December 7th, this zoomed-in satellite image captures the Thomas fire in the mountains north of Ventura. At this point, just three days old, the fire had already burned more than 100,000 acres. Over the course of the following two weeks, the easterly Santa Ana winds pushed the fire steadily westwards. This shows a view towards the east from along the coastline near Montecito. It must have been a very stressful time for those living in Montecito and Santa Barbara, with the fire getting closer and closer each day. Downwind of the fire, the smell of smoke would have been a constant. This map shows the fire's progression. By the time it was finally extinguished, on the 24th of December, it had become the largest fire in the state's history, burning around 280,000 acres, about one fifth of the total for that entire California fire season. Over 100,000 people had been forced to evacuate their homes, and tragically two people had also lost their lives. Residents of Montecito were forced to evacuate on December 10th, as the fire was getting dangerously close. It reached furthest west in the middle of the month when it burned the crest of Santa Inés Mountains, due north of Montecito. This photo shows Carpentiera, a few kilometers east of Montecito, with the burning Santa Inés Mountains behind. The fire completely stripped the mountains of vegetation. Eventually the evacuation orders in Montecito were lifted on December 21st, 2017. On January 5th, 2018, two weeks after the fires had been put out, a strong low-pressure system and cold front developed off the coast of California. The system moved onto the mainland on January 8th, bringing heavy rain to southern California. Over a two-day period, about four inches fell on the Santa Inés Mountains north of Montecito, including half an inch, or 13 millimeters, during a single five-minute period, at about half past three in the morning of January 9th. In the last lecture, we discussed how under normal conditions, vegetation helps to stabilize hill slopes. Vegetation canopy protects the topsoil from direct impact by raindrops, and allows more of the rainwater to soak gradually into the ground. Vegetation roots act as hillside soil stabilizers, and healthy topsoil contains burrowing animals that raise porosity, allowing rain to seep through as groundwater. When vegetation is removed by wildfires, the remaining soil consists of ash and clay. This has much less porosity, and so water cannot seep through as efficiently. During the intense storm on the morning of January 9th, the large volume of rainwater could not be absorbed into the ground as normal, and instead flowed over the surface as so-called runoff, quickly entraining ash and soil and forming mud. The mud was quickly channelized into mudflows in the creeks and streambeds of the southern Santa Ynez Mountains. This map shows the worst impacted areas surrounding Montecito, with the main streams marked in white. On the evening of 8th January, about 21,000 residents were ordered to evacuate from the parts of Santa Barbara, Ventura, and Los Angeles counties that had been impacted by the Thomas Fire. This shows the mandatory evacuation zone for Montecito. Residents of neighboring areas were also advised to evacuate, but voluntarily. Unfortunately, the call to evacuate and the warning messages sent by the National Weather Service arrived too late to prompt Montecito residents to seek safe areas. Many residents in the mandatory evacuation zone, and most residents in the voluntary evacuation zone, ignored the warnings and stayed in their homes. Many were left jaded by having to evacuate during the Thomas Fire a few weeks previously, a state of mind termed evacuation fatigue. This video shows the moment the mudflows struck in the early hours of January 9th. Note the low viscosity of the mud and the fact that it had already entrained large tree trunks. Turn around! The flash flood's right there! The flash flood's right there! Get out of here! Go! Oh my god, mom! Close the door! It was a million miles an hour in slow motion, if that makes sense. I clicked into survival gear, survival mode. Wake dad up! Every second, it's just roaring and banging against the house and the most vicious, violent sounds you've ever heard. Oh my god. Well this was somebody's driveway. There are three cars destroyed, buried inside that rubble. And looking at this house, it's difficult to believe that anyone on this street survived. But many did, and their stories are remarkable. People walk their dogs through here. There's trails. My kids have grown up riding their bikes. Two young boys were swept out of their home along with their mother in the middle of the night. And their dog is gone. And they're lucky to be fine. I mean, it's just like a war zone here. There's homes that are just missing. And I walked down the street and I see balls and toys and bicycles and shoes and socks and knives and hammers. And it's like people's lives are just washed to the ocean. This shows a perspective view of the Montecito evacuation zone. The worst impacted area was San Isidro Creek in the east of the city. This satellite image captured before the Thomas Fire shows where the creek exits the Santa Ynez Mountains. This shows the same area after the mudflows. The charred hillslopes of the Thomas Fire are obvious, but notice also the large boulders transported downstream by the powerful mudflows. A little further downstream, the sheer volume of the mudflows, which were up to five meters in height and moved at speeds of up to 30 kilometers per hour, overwhelmed the San Isidro Creek and spilled out onto neighboring streets. Again, here are some before and after satellite photographs. Several houses on Randall Road were completely stripped away. Others, like the one circled on the map, were buried in mud. Again, note the large boulders transported and deposited by the mudflow. This helicopter footage was taken from the neighborhoods adjoining San Isidro Creek. This home is completely buried. Wow. Was that a home? That's something knocked off the foundation. This home is completely buried. Wow. Was that a home? That's something knocked off the foundation. This home is completely buried. Wow. Was that a home? That's something knocked off the foundation. Look at the size of these boulders here, literally just on this home. This is Glen Oaks Drive. 1700 block of Glen Oaks Drive. This one is just amazing. This is what makes it dangerous is all these rocks and boulders. Bell tolls. Bell tolls. Bell tolls. Bell tolls. Bell tolls. Bell tolls. Bell tolls. Bell tolls. Bell tolls. At the mouth of San Ysidro Creek, the impacts were less severe, but note the flooding of California Highway 101 following the mudflow. If you look very carefully at the circled area on the beach, you can see a pair of cars that have been washed downstream, probably from the Randall Road area. Here they are on the beach. Further west in Montecito Center, the region around the Montecito Inn, a landmark hotel built by Charlie Chaplin, was also impacted. Again, mud spilled out of the creek and onto neighboring roads. Another section of Highway 101 was flooded with mud. It took 12 days to clear the road of debris and reopen this important transportation route.