In the second lecture video, we'll look at storm surges and coastal flooding, and then move on to tornadoes. A storm surge is an abrupt rise in sea level caused by the landward approach of a cyclone. There are two causes to these surges. The main cause is a strong onshore wind that piles up ocean water towards land, the so called wind-driven surge. A secondary and more minor effect is low atmospheric pressure beneath the eye of the cyclone that pulls the sea surface upwards, producing a mound of seawater. This is the so called pressure-driven surge. As implied in this graphic, they often arrive at the coast just before the tropical cyclone makes landfall, and are most dangerous when they coincide with high tide. The strongest tropical cyclones, those reaching category 4 to 5, are often accompanied by storm surges that exceed 5 metres. In the Northern Hemisphere, where hurricanes and typhoons rotate anti-clockwise, maximum storm surges occur 15 to 30 kilometres to the right of the eye landfall point, which is typically where winds are strongest. This video discusses storm surges in New Orleans during the 2005 Hurricane Katrina. In late August 2005, Hurricane Katrina was moving its way across the Gulf Coast. It was classified as a category 3 storm. Dangerous, but in a region with a long history of category 4 and 5 hurricanes, it wasn't expected to be the most intense. Katrina was only one day away from the Louisiana coast when the mayor of New Orleans issued an evacuation order. Unfortunately, it was too late. The sea level had already risen in a phenomenon called storm surge. Water rapidly rose up against the city's levees, a series of walls designed to keep the area from flooding. Before Katrina made landfall, the levees broke. A wall of water rushed into the city, trapping thousands. What followed was one of the worst natural disasters in U.S. history. We're expecting storm surge of 20 to 30 feet high. Floodwaters are drenching city streets. A levee broke during the height of the storm. There are bodies floating in the water there. Storm surge was the main cause of death during Katrina. In fact, it can be the most dangerous part of any hurricane. It occurs when strong winds from an approaching hurricane push water into the shore. As the sea rises, a bulge of water sweeps over coastal areas, causing destruction along the way. These are the normal astronomical tides at Dauphin Island, to the east of New Orleans. When you compare them to the water levels during Hurricane Katrina, you can see the dramatic rise. That's the storm surge. What makes this rise dangerous is that it starts to build up before the hurricane makes landfall. So the coastal flooding from it can make evacuation procedures and the impact of a hurricane much worse. In 2008, Hurricane Ike caused a big storm surge around Galveston, Texas, a day before landfall. The rising water cut off evacuation routes, stranding hundreds. Storm surge can also be unpredictable. Rising sea levels caused by global warming increase the risk of storm surge, but there are many factors that can change its size and strength. For example, the largest one recorded before Katrina was about 22 feet, during Hurricane Camille in 1969. But Camille was a Category 5 storm with 190 mph winds. Katrina was only a Category 3 with 130 mph winds, but had a storm surge of about 28 feet. Katrina had lower winds than Camille, but it was twice as wide, which dramatically increased the storm surge. In addition to wind speeds, meteorologists predict storm surge by taking into account the size of the storm, its direction, angle of approach, pressure, and the shape and depth of the coast. These calculations help forecasters warn communities at risk, but they're not often enough to prevent damage on the ground. This map shows the highest storm surge events worldwide since 1880. In the U.S., the eastern and southeastern coastlines are among the most vulnerable areas for storm surges in the world. Along the east coast, Hurricane Sandy got its strength from a massive storm surge in 2012. On the Gulf Coast side, places like Texas and South Florida have seen multiple hurricanes, so they've built infrastructure to help defend against excess flooding. Levees and seawalls are designed to stop or redirect rising water away from the cities. But even those can be inadequate, as seen during Hurricanes Katrina and more recently, Harvey. Storm surge hazards are likely to increase substantially in the near future due to global sea level rise. This is occurring for a number of reasons. Most importantly, as water warms, it increases in volume, so-called thermal expansion. Of course, melting ice, particularly from Antarctica and Greenland, also adds water to the oceans. Global average sea level has already risen by about 20 centimeters since reliable record keeping began in about 1880 CE. Predictions of future sea level rise are difficult due to large uncertainties in melting rates and ocean heat storage. Most models suggest between 0.3 and 1.2 meters of rise by the end of this century, but larger values cannot be ruled out. In the United States, 5 million people live below 1.2 meters above sea level. In China, it is an estimated 50 million. Sea level rise will have major humanitarian and geopolitical impacts throughout this century. In the context of this lecture, it will greatly increase coastal vulnerability to storm surges. Sea levels set a baseline for how impactful these events can be. As local sea level rises, so does that baseline, allowing coastal storm surges to penetrate further and further inland. We'll now move on to tornadoes. Tornadoes are defined as rapidly rotating columns of air that are in contact with both the surface of the Earth and the base of a thunderstorm cloud. They are the most intense of all atmospheric phenomena, with wind speeds of up to 500 kilometers per hour. They can cause substantial damage, blowing off roofs, blowing whole buildings off their foundations, and in the worst instances, completely demolishing buildings. They can batter people and buildings with airborne projectiles, throw people around, pick them up and carry them. However, they are also highly localized, so the damage is usually much less extensive than for a major tropical cyclone. This video shows the formation of a tornado in Colorado in 2010. The video is about four and a half minutes in length. The early part is sped up 10 times. At the beginning, we can observe the base of a thunderstorm cloud with a strong rotation of the airflow. After a while, a tongue of rapidly rotating, condensed water vapor protrudes downwards from the base of the cloud. This is cone-shaped at first, but then sharpens into a needle shape. Prior to touchdown, this feature is called a funnel cloud. If and when the tip of the funnel cloud makes contact with the Earth's surface, it is then classified as a tornado. You can see that the tornado funnel is very narrow at first, but it quickly grows. Magnifique! Elle arrive sur nous, non? Mais non, c'est bon. Oh, qu'elle est belle! Elle arrive, elle arrive, hein? De toute façon, on les garde avec les voiles, si jamais. De toute façon, on les garde avec les voiles, si jamais. Oh, qu'elle est belle! C'est quoi? C'est ce qu'il y a? Je ne les connais pas, les mecs. Mets-toi devant, mets-toi devant, mets-toi devant! Vas-y! Mike! Mets-toi devant! Thunderstorms are associated with cumulonimbus clouds, towering clouds of dense water vapor carried by powerful upward air currents. These updrafts can be strong enough that the cloud breaks through the troposphere and into the lower levels of the stratosphere up to 20 kilometers above ground. However, the strong updrafts are not sufficient on their own to form tornadoes. Another important factor is the presence of large clouds in the atmosphere. These clouds are called cumulonimbus clouds. These clouds are called cumulonimbus clouds. These clouds are called cumulonimbus clouds. Another important factor is the presence of strong wind speeds in the upper troposphere which help to shear the clouds. which help to shear the clouds. So-called single-cell thunderstorms occur in regions with low wind shear and typically only last around an hour. and typically only last around an hour. Warm, moist air rises vertically in a single updraft. The moisture condenses from the cooling air and the falling rain or hail causes a cool downdraft that suppresses the updraft. This limits thunderstorm intensity and duration and greatly reduces the chance of a tornado. So-called supercell thunderstorms are a different matter. These occur in regions with higher wind shear which shifts the updraft tilting the thundercloud into an anvil shape. This separates the warm updraft from the cool downdraft allowing for much more intense and longer lasting thunderstorms which have a much higher chance of generating a tornado. This photograph from an aircraft shows a clear example of the anvil shape that is characteristics of supercell thunderstorms. The thunderstorms can reach enormous sizes. This satellite image shows the same storm cloud to be about 300 km wide around one third of the surface area of the state of Oklahoma. The largest supercell thunderstorms can be responsible for not just one but multiple tornadoes over a period of a few days. This is known as a tornado outbreak. This particular outbreak included 115 tornadoes over the course of six days. The largest of them at El Reno, Oklahoma on the 31st of May 2013 included the widest tornado funnel on record at an incredible 4 km wide. The largest, costliest and one of the deadliest tornado outbreaks of all time was the so called 2011 super outbreak which was spawned by several tornadoes within a huge extra tropical cyclone system. A total of 360 individual tornadoes were recorded over the course of four days with over half of these recorded in just three states Alabama, Mississippi and Tennessee. However, tornadoes were recorded as far south as Florida and as far north as southern Ontario and upstate New York. A total of 324 people were killed including 316 people on just one day, the 27th of April. About three quarters of the fatalities occurred within the state of Alabama. The cost of the disaster is estimated to be about $10 billion. On this map the US states are coloured by the average annual number of tornadoes from 1991 to 2015 with individual tornado tracks in grey. Tornado Alley is the colloquial name given to the swath of the American Midwest from Texas in the south to Minnesota and the Dakotas in the north where tornadoes are most common. Tornado Alley accounts for somewhere between half and three quarters of the world's recorded tornadoes annually. Most of them occur within the spring. The US is also home to several of the deadliest tornadoes on record with 14 individual tornadoes killing at least 100 people. The most recent of these was the 2011 Joplin, Missouri tornado which occurred less than one month after the 2011 super outbreak and killed 158 people. By far the worst tornado in the US and indeed the second deadliest tornado on record globally was the Tri-State tornado of March 18, 1925 which killed 695 people. The reason for the fatality count was the prolonged duration of the tornado at nearly 4 hours and its exceptional 350km long tornado track which spanned parts of three states starting in Missouri, crossing southern Illinois before dissipating in southern Indiana hence the name given to this tornado. The high frequency of tornadoes in Tornado Alley is largely the consequence of North America's geography which results in the confluence of distinct air masses which is ideal for breeding strong supercell thunderstorms. Firstly, warm, moist air from the Gulf of Mexico is easily advected at low altitude across Texas and into the mid-continent with few topographic barriers to arrest or divert it. This is what's shown in green. Secondly, shown in blue, the Rocky Mountains block Pacific-sourced moisture and instead provide a source of cold, dry air at mid-levels of the troposphere. This flows downslope to meet with the warm, moist air from the Gulf of Mexico. The convergence of the two air masses causes atmospheric instabilities and rotation within thunderstorm clouds within the pink area. Finally, the high altitude, high velocity jet stream, shown here in turquoise, provides a persistent westerly flow in the upper troposphere that shears the incipient storm cells and ensures that the thunderstorms are supercell in nature. This is shown in this graphic. Canada lies at the northern end of Tornado Alley and records an average of around 100 tornadoes per year, around one-twelfth of the number in the US but still the second largest number of any country. You can see that the vast majority occur in the southern prairie provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba or in southernmost Ontario. They mostly occur during the summer months of June, July and August later than those in the US and this is the consequence of the confluence zone of air masses radiating northwards through the year. Canadian tornadoes have historically caused fewer fatalities than tornadoes in the US, mostly because of our sparser population density but also because of the stronger housing construction due to our colder climate. The deadliest tornado in Canadian history was one that struck Regina on Sunday, June 30, 1912. 28 people were killed in this tornado. There is a smaller registered tornado zone in central BC which is unusual as it lies west of the Rocky Mountains. Rarely, tornadoes are even observed on Vancouver Island and the lower mainland. This image shows a recent tornado that formed over the Strait of Georgia and which came ashore to cause some minor damage on the UBC campus in Vancouver. This was only the third tornado recorded in the city of Vancouver and the first in 30 years within the wider lower mainland region. This much smaller tornado hit suburban Victoria in May 2020 and was fortuitously captured by a doorbell camera. It can be seen throwing a trampoline in the air. The scale currently used to specify the intensity of any given tornado is known as the Enhanced Fujita Scale. The original Fujita Scale named after Japanese-American meteorologist Ted Fujita was developed in the early 1970s and was replaced by a new scale called the Enhanced Fujita Scale. This scale was designed to measure the intensity of any given tornado in the early 1970s and was replaced by the modern Enhanced version in 2007. The scale has six intensity categories from EF0 to EF5 representing increasing peak wind speeds and worsening degrees of damage. Tornado wind speed is very difficult to measure directly To be assigned a rating a tornado must first be surveyed by meteorologists and engineers who compare the observed damage to a list of damage indicators for different building types and different qualities of construction. The surveyors may also draw upon weather radar data witness testimonies media reports and any available imagery or video. Like other types of natural disaster you can see an inverse relationship between frequency and size. EF0 tornadoes account for more than half of all observed while EF5 tornadoes are rare, being seen on average about once per year around the world. There are also relationships between tornado intensity and physical size. The most intense tornadoes are often the widest and longest in duration and length. EF0 tornadoes are defined as those estimated to have 3 second gust speeds of between 65 and 85 miles per hour roughly the speed of a car on a major highway. More than half of all confirmed tornadoes are placed into this lowest category. EF0 tornadoes typically have path lengths of up to a few hundred metres and widths of up to 10 to 20 metres. These wind speeds are sufficient to cause superficial but not structural building damage. For example roof shingles, windows and chimneys might be damaged. Corrugated iron sheeting might be displaced as shown here. Trees may undergo branch damage but will not be uprooted. Tornadoes rated as EF1 involve estimated peak wind speeds of 86 to 110 miles per hour. They comprise around one quarter of all categorised tornadoes and have typical path lengths of up to 5 kilometres and widths of up to 50 metres. At these wind speeds, roofs can be badly damaged and outbuildings can be demolished and mobile homes can be overturned. Trees may also be uprooted. EF2 tornadoes involve estimated wind speeds of up to 135 miles per hour and comprise about one sixth of all registered tornadoes. Path lengths are typically several kilometres and widths are typically several tens of metres. At this rating, tornadoes start to cause much more considerable damage. Wood frame homes like the one shown here can be badly damaged or even lifted off their foundations. Mobile homes would be completely destroyed at this rating. Tornadoes rated as EF3 involve estimated peak wind speeds of up to 165 miles per hour. They account for a few percent of all tornadoes. Their path lengths are typically a few tens of kilometres and widths are typically a few hundred metres. At this rating, even well-built wood frame homes will be completely destroyed with their exterior walls collapsed and roofs blown off. EF4 tornadoes can include gusts of up to 200 miles an hour but account for less than one percent of all tornadoes. Path lengths are typically around 100 kilometres and widths around one kilometre so these can damage numerous settlements. Damage from EF4 tornadoes is classified as devastating with even modern commercial buildings made from steel and concrete often destroyed. The worst category of tornadoes are those rated EF5. They are defined as those whose strongest wind gusts are estimated to exceed 200 miles per hour. Path lengths can be well in excess of 100 kilometres and path widths of up to 4 kilometres are possible. These tornadoes can cause genuinely incredible damage. For example, cars can be picked up and transported kilometres away from where they were parked. This completes the class on tropical cyclones and tornadoes. Next time we'll take a closer look at flooding hazards.