This lecture will comprise a whistle-stop tour of two of the most significant weather hazards – tropical cyclones and tornadoes. Both are characterised by extreme wind speeds, which will be the main focus of today's lecture. However, much of the hazard from tropical cyclones is from flooding. This lecture will include a discussion of storm surges – coastal flooding caused by an abrupt rise in sea level during the landward approach of a cyclone. Otherwise, flooding hazards, including those related to rainfall events, will be the subject of a later lecture. We'll start by placing these weather phenomena in an appropriate geographic context by considering global patterns of atmospheric circulation. Because the Earth is spherical, the sun does not heat it in an even manner. The equator receives more radiative heat than the poles, because sun's rays strike the equator at a higher angle, and the radiation is thus concentrated within a smaller surface area. At the most basic level, it is this uneven heat distribution which is the basic driver of global atmospheric circulation, with winds acting to redistribute heat from the equator to the poles. Earth's global atmospheric circulation pattern is made up of three different wind cells in each hemisphere – the tropical Hadley cells, the mid-latitude Ferrel cells, and the polar cells at the poles. These cell regions correlate with what we call low-latitude, mid-latitude, and high-latitude regions. Low latitudes are between the equator and 30 degrees north and south, mid-latitudes stretch from 30 to 60 degrees, and high latitudes are from 60 degrees to the poles. These circulation cells not only transport heat from the equator to the polar regions, but also result in permanent regions of high and low pressure, which in turn give rise to Earth's different climatic zones. In low pressure areas, air rises, water vapour condenses into clouds, and there is greater rainfall. This is why the largest rainforests are found around the equator. In high pressure areas, the air is descending, so there is an absence of condensation, giving us the desert regions. Because the Earth is rotating, the winds within the circulation cells are also being pushed towards the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the southern hemisphere. This is known as the Coriolis effect. The following video from the UK's Met Office explains the effect in more detail. The key to the Coriolis effect lies in the fact that the Earth's surface rotates faster at the equator than at the poles. This is because the Earth is wider at the equator, as it has further to travel in one day. The result of this means that as air moves away from the equator, it doesn't move in a straight line relative to the Earth's surface. Instead, it appears to an observer on the ground to move in a slightly curved direction. But there is no physical force causing this deflection. As the atmosphere rotates with the Earth, it is just due to the air flowing from a region that is moving faster to a region that is moving more slowly. To explain this further, imagine an air parcel as a ball. The ball is thrown from the equator towards a point near the North Pole. Even though it moves in a straight line, the ball will appear to an observer on the ground to curve away and land to the right of its target, as the point near the North Pole is moving more slowly and is not caught up. If the ball is now thrown from the North Pole towards a point near the equator, it will again appear to a surface observer to land to the right of its target. But this time, it's because the Earth's surface at the equator is moving faster and is moved ahead of the ball. This effect only happens on objects that are in motion. This deflection is a major factor in explaining why winds blow anticlockwise around low pressure and clockwise around high pressure in the Northern Hemisphere and vice versa in the Southern Hemisphere. So when flowing towards the North Pole, air is deflected towards the east. And when travelling southwards, back towards the equator, it is deflected westwards. The same overall result occurs in the Southern Hemisphere. Winds at the surface are also subject to deflection from the Coriolis force. The surface flow of the Hadley cells form the persistent trade winds. As air flows towards the equator, it is deflected towards the west in both hemispheres, forming the northeast trade winds in the Northern Hemisphere and the southeast trade winds in the Southern Hemisphere. The surface wind in the Ferrel cells would flow from a southerly direction in the Northern Hemisphere. But the Coriolis effect causes this wind to be deflected to the right, leading to the prevailing westerly and southwesterly winds often experienced over the UK. Tropical cyclones are defined as storms with winds sustained for at least one minute at speeds greater than 120 km per hour. They are the most destructive of weather disasters, affecting large areas of thousands of square kilometres, with three types of hazard. Firstly, very high wind speeds of up to around 240 km per hour. Secondly, storm surges which can raise sea level by up to 6 metres. And thirdly, heavy rains and subsequent flooding and landsliding. The deadliest tropical cyclone to date was the 1970 Cyclone Bola, which killed more than 300,000 people in Bangladesh, mostly due to the storm surge which flooded low-lying coastal regions. Tropical cyclones form over ocean water between 5 and 20 degrees north and south, and are subdivided geographically into hurricanes, typhoons and cyclones. Hurricanes form in the Atlantic Ocean or the Eastern Pacific Ocean. Typhoons form in the Northwestern Pacific Ocean. And cyclones form in the Southwestern Pacific or the Indian Ocean. Because of the Coriolis effect, the path of the tropical cyclone follows a curve. Hurricanes are deflected to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. Typhoons are deflected to the right and cyclones to the left. Tropical cyclones do not form spontaneously but require particular conditions, and this helps explain why they do not form in all low-latitude oceanic regions. Firstly, they require large areas of seawater warmed to at least 27 degrees Celsius, to depths of at least 50 metres. These conditions greatly enhance the amount of water vapour that can be evaporated. These conditions explain their absence from the Southeastern Pacific Ocean, where water temperatures are too cool, as well as from the Red Sea and Persian Gulf, where there is simply insufficient ocean surface area. Secondly, unstable air is required for the thunderclouds to form. This explains why tropical cyclones do not form right along the equator. The doldrums is an expression of the historical maritime usage, describing parts of the equatorial Atlantic and Pacific Oceans affected by low pressures and calm prevailing winds. Winds can disappear altogether for periods of days or weeks, trapping sailing ships. Thirdly, weak vertical wind shear is needed, or the storm will quickly break up. This explains why tropical cyclones do not form in the South Atlantic, which tends to be windier than other low-latitude oceanic areas. There are four stages to the formation of a tropical cyclone. Firstly, the ocean surface is warmed to at least 27 degrees Celsius, usually during the summer and during periods of high humidity. Secondly, the warm seawater starts to evaporate, the warm, humid air rises, and the water vapour cools and condenses to form storm clouds. Thirdly, the rotation of the Earth causes the system to spin. As the warm air continues to rise, more air is sucked in, evaporating more ocean surface water and feeding the growing storm further. Finally, an eye and an eyewall emerge at the centre of the system. The eye is a circular region, usually between 30 and 60 kilometres in diameter, in which cold air is sucked downwards, producing calm, clear weather. Just outside the eye, the eyewall is the surrounding cylinder of upward-spiralling winds that have the strongest wind speeds of the entire system. This shows an amazing satellite photograph of a real eye and its surrounding eyewall. Tropical cyclones do not form instantaneously, but rather grow from modest beginnings, and the weather systems that emerge during this process are given different names. In the early stages, low pressure draws in surrounding thunderstorms with weak winds of less than 40 kilometres per hour. These systems are called tropical disturbances, and are too common to be named or numbered. Sometimes, storms then coalesce into what's known as a tropical depression. Air is pulled towards the low pressure core, and then upwards. Winds strengthened between 40 and 60 kilometres an hour. Tropical depressions are common enough not to be named, but they are numbered. A tropical storm has stronger winds of between 60 and 120 kilometres per hour that start to form a cyclonic or rotational pattern. These are now significant enough to be given a name in order to simplify communication between weather forecasters and the general public, in case there is a need to issue a warning or emergency alert. Finally, if the wind speeds exceed 120 kilometres per hour, we call the system a tropical cyclone. These are also identified by name, and given a category from 1 to 5, depending on the peak wind speeds. We'll come to the categorisation shortly. Because of the Coriolis effect, the direction of flow around the eye is opposite in opposite hemispheres. Cyclonic flow is anticlockwise in the northern hemisphere, and clockwise in the southern hemisphere. The actual wind speed experienced on the ground is a combination of the velocity of the storm along its track, added or subtracted from the wind speed within the storm. For this reason, ground wind speeds are usually higher on one side of the eye than on the other. In this example, a hurricane with an internal wind speed of 160 kilometres per hour is moving towards the north-west at 30 kilometres an hour. The ground wind speed to the north-east of the eye is 190 kilometres an hour, but the ground wind speed to the south-west is only 130 kilometres an hour. Of course, the ground wind speeds at any given point also change with time as the storm passes by. Winds intensify as the eye wall passes overhead, suddenly die away as the eye itself passes overhead, and then intensify again as the opposite eye wall passes over, with winds now in the opposite direction. The North Atlantic hurricane season lasts from early June to late November, peaking between August and October. A hurricane will generally start life as a tropical disturbance at 10 to 20 degrees north. The disturbance first moves westwards, carried by the easterly trade winds, and gathering strength. Later it will move northwards, to the right, by the Coriolis effect, and finally eastwards at mid-latitudes, pushed by westerly winds. The hurricane will start to decline when its warm water energy source is cut off, either as it makes landfall over the southeastern United States, or as it passes over colder waters of the North Atlantic. Typically this will occur 10 to 15 days into the life cycle of the system. However, when cyclones enter mid-latitudes of 30 to 40 degrees, they can sometimes interact with other weather systems and can unexpectedly gain strength. We call these extra-tropical cyclones, with the extra meaning outside, since they are now outside of the tropics. This is quite a common occurrence in the North Atlantic, and can extend the lifespan of the system by up to a month. This map shows historical hurricane tracks, coloured according to the hurricane category. You can see that eastern Canada has been impacted by several extra-tropical cyclones, as far west as Ontario. The hurricane paths on this map are influenced largely by the size, shape and position of an Atlantic high-pressure zone called the Subtropical Ridge, or the Bermuda-Azores High. A smaller high-pressure cell allows hurricanes to stay over the Atlantic Ocean. A larger high-pressure cell may guide hurricanes along the eastern coast of the US. If the pressure cell moves north, it directs hurricanes towards the northeastern US. And if the high-pressure cell moves south, it directs hurricanes into the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico. Though western Canada is at much lower risk from extra-tropical cyclones than eastern Canada, it can occasionally be impacted, either by hurricanes that form in the eastern Pacific Ocean, west of Central America, or more commonly by typhoons that form in the central and western Pacific Ocean. Typhoon Frida in 1962 was one of the worst to affect western Canada. The symbols on this map show its path at 6-hour intervals, coloured by storm strength. Triangles show its transition to extra-tropical. It formed over the central Pacific Ocean, took two weeks to travel the 8,000km across the Pacific Ocean, and made landfall right here over Vancouver Island. This was one of the most powerful extra-tropical cyclones recorded in North America in the 20th century. It killed 46 people, including 5 here in BC. One third of the trees in Stanley Park, Vancouver, were felled. Frida is one of two typhoons to have killed people on the west coast of BC. The other was Typhoon Ogden in 1984, which also killed 5 people. A storm's energy can be expressed in terajoules. One terajoule is 1,000 billion, or 1,000,000,000 joules. This energy is calculated on the basis of its wind speed and the size of its wind field. More typically though, tropical cyclone strength is categorised by peak sustained 1-minute wind speeds, according to the Saffir-Simpson scale. Category 1 cyclones can damage trees and cause minor damage to buildings, principally unanchored mobile homes. Category 2 cyclones can cause moderate damage to roofs and major damage to mobile homes. Some trees may be blown down. Category 3 cyclones cause extensive structural damage to houses and will completely destroy mobile homes. Large trees may be stripped of foliage and blown down. Category 4 cyclones cause heavy damage to houses. They are often accompanied by storm surges at the coast, causing flooding of low-lying areas up to several kilometres inland. And Category 5 cyclones cause absolutely catastrophic damage. Many houses will be overturned or blown away. This video shows the progression of damage through the Saffir-Simpson scale in graphic form. This is Category 1. Category 2. Category 3. Category 4. And wholesale destruction in Category 5. Here's some real footage of damage from one of the most recent devastating hurricanes, the 2018 Hurricane Michael, seen here hitting Florida. This hurricane killed 74 people and led to around $25 billion in damages. The video is a minute and a half long. I hope you enjoy it. This is Category 2. This is Category 3. Category 4. Structural damage from tropical cyclones can be mitigated in a number of ways. Buildings are often destroyed by first lifting off the roof, so securing this is a good first step. Eliminating or strengthening any eaves that project outwards from the roof and which can catch the wind is a good idea, as is strapping the roof to the walls inside the attic. Strong building codes can help to ensure more properties are properly secured and reinforced. Often, much of the damage comes not from high wind speeds but from subsequent flooding, either storm surges at the coast or extreme rainfall inland. Of course, it is much harder to secure homes from the effects of flooding if they are built in a susceptible area. Instead, land use planning should prevent residences from being built in low-lying coastal areas and floodplains in the first place. Unfortunately, in many large hurricane-prone cities, such as Houston shown here, it is too late for this. This map shows areas that were flooded in Houston in a recent cyclone there. Unfortunately, cyclone hazards are only going to increase in the foreseeable future as sea surface temperatures rise due to anthropogenic global warming. This is exacerbated by the fact that an estimated 90% of the excess heat from global warming is absorbed by the oceans. This rising ocean heat content provides more energy for tropical storms. The effect is most pronounced in the Atlantic Ocean, which is warming much faster than the Pacific or Indian Oceans. This is also borne out in data. Analysis of hurricanes over the past 50 years show that hurricanes are more prolonged, with the slowdown in their decay in direct proportion to the contemporaneous rise in sea surface temperature. Thus, whereas in the late 1960s a typical hurricane lost about 75% of its intensity in the first day past landfall, now the corresponding decay is only about 50%. It's also evident in the sheer number of hurricanes, as indicated in this graphic. Just a few years ago, the 2020 Atlantic hurricane season was the most active Atlantic hurricane season on record, with 14 hurricanes, more than double the average of 6 recorded annually since 1970.